Memorandum
To:          Altamaha Regional Water Planning Council
From:        Rick Brown and Katherine Zitsch, CDM
Date:        10/28/10
Subject: Council Meeting 8 - Summary
This memorandum provides the meeting summary of the Altamaha Regional Water Planning
Council Meeting 8 (CM 8), held on October 28, 2010 at the Sudie A. Fulford Community
Learning Center in Swainsboro.
1) Welcome and Introductions/Recap CM 6/Approve Agenda/Approve CM6 Summary
   Chairman Brinson Lanier called the meeting to order. The Council was welcomed by
   Swainsboro Mayor Charles Schwabe. He noted that the meeting is held at the Fulford
   Community Learning Center, which was a gift from Pete Correll of Georgia Pacific.
   Mayor Schwabe expressed his appreciation to the Council for their dedication and for
   investing their time to help plan for our water resources. He asked the Council to enjoy
   Swainsboro and the region. Swainsboro-Emanuel County Chamber of Commerce
   President and CEO Bill Rogers also welcomed the Council to Swainsboro. He noted some
   of the improvements to East Georgia College including the addition of dormitories and
   sports programs.
   The PC thanked Council Member Steve Meeks for the refreshments and arranging the
   facility. The PC then provided an overview of the agenda and asked for a motion to
   approve the agenda; motion by Ed Jeffords, second by Gerald Dewitt.
   The PC then provided a recap of the Macon Joint Meeting highlighting the following
   points:
       •    The meeting was a panel format with 4 panels; focusing on water quality,
            agricultural water use, water supply needs, local government, neighboring, and
            state coordination. The meeting was well attended by all Councils with over 50
            Council members and about 50 interested public/stakeholders.
       •    A few themes/key points discussed at the meeting: the meeting provided a good
            overview of the progress being made by various Councils; many regions do not
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 2
           have gaps; funding is a major challenge; additional data collection/ improvement,
           and adaptive management should be the foundational approach to the current and
           future water plans.
   The meeting continued with an overview of the objectives for Council Meeting 8. These
   included:
       •   Review current and future conditions resource assessment model results and
           Selection of draft Management Practices for Regional Water Resources
       •   Review and discuss Energy Forecasts
       •   Review and discuss Initial Water Plan Sections
       •   Discuss and develop targeted outreach to further communicate with, and solicit
           input from, local governments, water and wastewater utilities, and other key
           stakeholders
       •    Review and discuss schedule for completing Regional Water Plan; identify next
           steps for Shared Resources Discussion
   The PC briefly summarized the plans for the next two Council meetings and proposed
   Vidalia as the location for December 16 (CM 8) and January 11 for CM 9. The PC asked
   Council members to check those dates and we would finalize them or alternatives at the
   end of the day.
   The Council next address a topic that had been tabled at the last Council meeting. The
   Council had tabled the topic or revisiting the “fishing” resolution that had been proposed
   by Len Hauss at CM 6 because he was not at CM 7. It appears that Mr. Hauss may not be
   able to attend the next few meetings and so the Council wanted to act on revisiting the
   need for the resolution. A short discussion took place in which Council members
   expressed support for regional resources, such as fishing, but wanted to make sure that it
   was in the overall context of all the regional needs and goals. Several Council members
   noted that it might be better to incorporate the concept of fishing into the vision and goals
   rather than as a separate resolution and this would allow the proper context. The chair
   noted that perhaps the Council could change from the original resolution and instead add
   fish and wildlife concepts to vision and goals.
   A suggested revised vision was proposed with the change highlighted in Bold:
   The vision of the Altamaha Regional Water Planning Council is to wisely manage,
   develop, and protect the region’s water resources for current and future generations by
   ensuring that the Altamaha basin’s water resources are sustainably managed to enhance
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 3
   quality of life and public health, protect natural systems including fishing, wildlife and
   wildlife utilization activities, and support the basin’s economy.”
   The Council decided to reflect on this language and review it again later in the meeting.
   The PC then proceeded to the next major agenda item.
2) Selection of Draft Management Practices – PC and Management Practices Subcommittee
   It was noted that today’s session includes the selection of draft management practices and
   it was emphasized that the practice are still draft – they can change in the upcoming
   month or so – but this allows Kevin to relay the draft management practices to EPD so
   that they can provide initial feedback. The PC handed out a draft list of management
   practices and noted that the summary should not be viewed as a consensus document
   from the Management Practices Subcommittee. Some members want general practices
   and some wanted more specific, etc. The idea was to leave practices on the list to get
   further discussion from full Council.
   A Council member noted that he was worried about “scope creep” and that as things roll
   out, concerned this will be a prescriptive solution to all sites in the area, some of which we
   don’t have enough data to address. This might be interpreted to fix all streams of all sizes
   without regard to data. When this is finished, we need a statement that efforts Council
   engaged in are limited in scope and only to support those gaps identified in the process to
   date.
   The PC provided a broad overview of the condition of regional resources – generally,
   there are no groundwater gaps on a regional basis for our region. Some of our neighbors
   aren’t quite as comfortable with this conclusion. The Altamaha Region does have some
   surface water gaps mainly on the Canoochee River, and a small portion of our region has
   uses associated with gaps on the Alapaha and the Satilla. In addition, there are/may be
   point source gaps for water quality as well as well as infrastructure gaps (need to
   expanded facilities before gap occurs).There are some existing non-point source TMDLs
   The PC then walked through the document starting with a summary of gaps/forecasted
   needs: Management practices subcommittee highlights it should be noted that the
   following is not intended to capture every topic but the general flow of the discussion,
   The reader should also refer to the management practices handout.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 4
   Continue to develop Upper Floridan.
   CM: Need to add other aquifers and protect other aquifers over the long-term. Water is
   our asset. Small wells in higher aquifers don’t require permits if less than 100,000 gallons
   per day. Continue to drill wells withdraw and sustainably develop Upper Floridan and
   other prioritized aquifers and use of other aquifers in the region may be a better way to
   express this.
   Encourage implementation and adherence to Water Conservation Implementation Plan
   by local/governments/utilities; Tiers 1 and 2 for M&I; Tiers 3 & 4 for Agricultural (Ag)
   groundwater use in gap areas. Continue to do well and implement the plans you have
   (M&I) and for Ag, practices that will reduce demand.
   Encourage land use practices that protect recharge areas of Upper Floridan. Most
   communities also have ordinances that protect groundwater recharge zones.
   Discussion - Change to protect aquifer recharge areas and not list a specific aquifer.
   Department of Community Affairs (DCA) - EPD requirements are not being enforced.
   Concern that it’s broad language. What does “encourage land use practices” encompass?
   DCA looking at more sustainable development. Move growth where it can be. Concerned
   about intent of laws enacted being superseded by people that come into the process later.
   There is nothing we can do to keep people from interpreting what you say to mean
   something else. What we write and get finally approved, it will be interpreted in many
   areas. We need to add commentary on what we were thinking when plan is finalized in
   order to help with this issue. Several Council members commented that they would like to
   delete: Work with Florida on Florida demands and issues for future monitoring and refine
   modeling if warranted. Subterranean wedge feature is specific to Camden County. There
   is also a fault line along our southern region so, we don’t affect Florida; recommend
   deleting this.
   Continue to confirm frequency, duration, and of gaps.
        -   Additional data on Ag and consumptive use assumption (100%). CM - We may
            have overstated the gap. PC - From Dr. Hook’s work – he doesn’t think he’s
            overestimated surface water use he noted that it may even be found that there is
            more surface water use as data is refined.
        -   Improve metering data and assumption on river flow.
             CM - need to be sure report language includes what our intent was.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 5
       -   Collaborate/support research on improvement irrigation efficiency measures and
           development of lower water use crops.
       -   Promote practices and educate stakeholders to minimize impacts to surface water
           associate with existing pumping/use of shallow/surficial aquifers that may
           impact surface.
   CM – In regard to water conservation implementation plan - Tier 3 & 4 conservation
   practices - many farmers are already doing these things, but there may be some room for
   additional savings
   Additional/alternate water supply sources
   Modify pond operation minimum release in dry/gap years CM – this is not going to
   happen to get farmers together to change the operation of their ponds. Idea is not just to
   mandate this but to examine opportunities on an incentivized basis.
   Discussion of benefits of Land Application Systems (LAS) CM - incentivize is key
   improvements to discharge to stream to add that flow to the stream and that could be
   costly.
   Water Quality
   Practices where then discussed that could address point source and non-point source
   pollution. Best management practices were outlined for urban, Ag, and Forestry BMPs.
   CM – I have some concern over the way the forestry BMPs are described and this
   language needs to be changes to be more accurate.
   The chair noted that members should review the Georgia Water Conservation
   Implementation Plan as it has good information on water conservation that is directly
   applicable to the work that is being completed here. The PC also handed out a memo from
   Linda MacGregor that describes how the plan could be used as a resource to Councils.
3) Council Discussion of Management Practices
   Chair - By the end of November, we need the draft management practices generally
   worded the way we want them worded. If we can get a consensus – majority of us – to
   submit a plan, it will become a part of the Georgia water plan that will be submitted for
   approval. The following summary capture the general discussion that occurred between
   the Council member.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 6
   We need to incorporate a statement at the end that there needs to be some sort of an
   incentive or some sort of payment for some of the plans we are promoting so that local
   jurisdictions are not saddled with some gap recommendation that they can’t fund.
   We need to weigh the benefit versus the cost. That needs to be taken into consideration –
   what will someone need to spend to get a benefit?
   How does the Water Conservation Implementation Plan (WCI) mirror the tier 1, 2 and 3 in
   our management practices handout? The PC migrated the information directly from the
   WCIP to create the tiers in our draft management practices handout.
   Surface water flows in the Ocmulgee, Oconee and Altamaha rivers – there is no gap
   according to the minimum flow regime, but I request that this Council consider the
   minimum flow be 50% more than current minimum flow. This is for fishing in these
   rivers. Otherwise other uses can use that flow and we’d be at 7Q10. There is a need for
   flows that mimic the historic patterns of our rivers – periods of drought and flood.
   Maybe we need statement that we need more research into what the minimum flows
   should be. Does interim in-stream flow policy provide enough protection or does it need
   to be stronger?
   You can’t prevent 7Q10 from happening, you can prevent it from happening all of the
   time. Part of this was resolved by going to monthly 7Q10 (in 2001). Annual biomonitoring
   may also be important to better understand adverse impacts? Heading more towards
   adaptive management [describe previously}.
   Proposal: Council direct contractor to provide draft language under data
   collection/improvement or evaluating whether monthly 7Q10 flow criteria needs to be
   reviewed and other options that may be appropriated from a biological perspective.
   Interbasin transfers – already occur in Georgia. This is okay, we just don’t want to affect
   vision and/or goals. The key is that other regions should not divert water at the expense
   of this region. Just because one location doesn’t have gap and another does, deliberately
   taking water from one location to meet gap at another isn’t right.
   Want to make sure that folks upstream of us don’t take too much and mess it up for us.
   If you haven’t addressed your local people then the plan will not be well received. The
   discussion this afternoon highlights the need for more awareness and education rather
   than more regulations.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 7
4) Additional Outreach Needs
   The PC handed out a table indicating entities that have been preliminarily targeted for
   additional outreach, including major municipalities and water providers in the region.
   The PC asked Council to review the list and indicate anyone else to whom we should
   perform additional outreach. The PC also noted it will be important to identify
   implementation considerations for those entities that will be involved/effected by
   Council’s recommended Management Practices. Council noted it is also important that we
   do not have our recommendations “put a target” on anyone.
5) Election of Vice-Chair. It was noted that Mike Polsky resigned as the vice-chair of the
   Altamaha Committee, as he has recently moved to Texas. The Chair called for
   nominations of a new Vice Chair. Sue Sammons nominated Ed Jeffords. Jim Strickland
   seconded the motion and further motioned to close the nominations. Ed was elected
   unanimously.
   The chair also noted that a couple of the Council alternates have served faithfully while a
   couple of full Council members have not attended meetings. The chair suggested the
   Council should treat the alternates as full voting members. Ed Jeffords made a motion to
   do so and the motion carried unanimously.
6) Quantification of Gaps and Needs
   The PC provided a detailed handout of additional information that quantifies regional
   withdrawals, returns and gaps. Council was reminded that last meeting we reviewed the
   county by county assessments, but we urged caution in the sense that we need a regional
   plan. Now we’ve started a technical memo that takes this more regional approach;
   summarizes data on aquifer basis and at the surface water planning node. The handout
   we now have is a start of the tech memo that builds on everything we’ve given to you
   before. As you take it home today, we’re building our plan based on existing permits and
   plans. We’ve quantified know planned permit capacity or projects that we’ve identified
   and that helps fill the future need. Surface water planning nodes show withdrawals and
   returns. Planning is driven by withdrawals – need enough water to meet withdrawal
   needs. Gaps however are driven by consumption.
   The PC then showed the analysis of gaps at Claxton – about 85% of the Claxton gap can be
   solved with around 1000 acre-feet of water per year (note to Council to help with
   conversion we will at more information on conversions 1 acre-foot = .33 million gallons
   per day; so on annual basis the gap is fairly easy to address 1000 acre-feet X .33
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 8
   MGD/acre-foot = 325 million gallons/365 days = ~ 1 MGD. The challenge is one of
   timing as the gap typically occurs over a 30-90 day period). The PC is working with EPD
   to work towards closing most of the gaps but perhaps not every gap. This is because there
   is some uncertainty in the models and also the benefit versus impact may is much
   different for the large less frequent gaps; it is harder to close those last 15% of gaps.
   The handout shows withdrawals and returns. For example – at Claxton, the consumptive
   demand is approximately 6.7 mgd. This is an annual consumption volume of about 7,500
   acre-feet. Need to consider when the return flows are occurring. You must consider
   timing. If an entity is returning water at a time when there is no gap, then those returns
   can’t be credited against the gap. If we could save all of the water coming from return
   flows such as those going to an LAS or with storage in Dec, Jan, Mar and then in July
   when there was a gap, and then release it all when there is a gap, we could fill that need
   perfectly.
   Chair posed a question for consideration of the group – agriculture is responsible
   according to this for the biggest gap. When we’re talking about gap at Claxton or even at
   Kings Ferry, when you’re saying that ag is responsible for X% of the gap or so many
   million gallons of water, are you taking into consideration the entire drainage basin or just
   the river itself? PC – Yes, we take into account the streams and creeks that feed the rivers.
   Chair – the biggest contributor to the gap is ponds. If I remember right, Dr. Hook in times
   of drought in the summer when we do have rains, then ponds are capturing 30% of the
   run-off. Dr. Hook recognized groundwater to pond systems.
   One of our goals is to sustainably manage our resources. We have information on the
   Canoochee that there is a gap. We may encourage future permit holders to look elsewhere
   for water supplies. They should at a minimum work with EPD to make sure they don’t
   make the gap worse. Or, they should look towards going to groundwater rather than
   going to surface water.
   Need clarification/further research on groundwater –to pond, surface water to pond, and
   how groundwater supplements the ponds.
   Chair noted from Canoochee figure that man started influencing the river. He suggested
   that’s the portion we should consider ourselves with are those times when our practices
   can have an effect we are not talking about things we can’t address due to naturally
   occurring droughts. There were not many ponds in the 1950s when the 1954/1955
   drought occurred. That was naturally occurring.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 9
   The PC then highlighted some results of the nutrient modeling – look at hot spots and see
   what the predominant land use is so we can determine whether the impacts may be
   human or other. This plays into where we would emphasize more forestry practices rather
   than more agricultural practices.
   CM – I am concerned with how these results could be interpreted. Just because forestry
   may be a dominant land use in a hot spot that does not imply that forestry is the main
   source of nutrient loading. This needs to be made clear.
7) Energy Forecast Results
   The PC presented the results of the energy forecast. The forecast was developed by EPD
   and a consultant with input from an energy ad hoc committee. The ad hoc committee was
   made up of representatives from the power industry as well as GEFA. The goal of the
   forecast was to evaluate how water resources may be effect by energy needs.
   The PC made the following key points:
       • Energy production is somewhat unique in that some power generation facility
          withdrawal water but do not consume large amounts of water; some production
          methods do have higher consumption rates but overall the consumption on a
          statewide basis is about 7% of total withdrawal.
       • Single past cooling [condensing steam using a single heat transfer (cooling
          process)] represents 88% of withdrawal and these facilities withdraw higher
          volumes them other methods but return most of the water that is withdrawn.
       • In the Altamaha region we have evaporative/cooling tower facility so our regions
          consumption is higher than the statewide average.
   The PC highlighted that the forecast has several scenarios:
       •  2 - Power generation needs scenarios that includes: 1) baseline (1.74% growth,
          following historic trends); and 2) a “reasonable “ high scenario that has energy
          growing at a slightly higher growth rate (2.14%) than the mean trend.
       •  2 – Water Demand scenarios: 1) a scenario that quantifies water demand for
          planned facilities through 2017 and 2) a scenario that quantifies the additional
          water demand required if energy production from existing generating capacity is
          maximized (this scenario does not meet all statewide power needs through the
          forecast horizon).
       •   An Alternative Power Needs Scenario to quantify the total regional and statewide
          water needs to meet forecasted demands through the entire planning horizon.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 10
   The PC noted that the criterion used to determine planned facilities through 2017 was
   based on an accounting of those facilities with a completed Air Quality permit
   application. It was also noted the energy forecast is regional through 2020 (2017). Beyond
   2050 the forecasted need is at the statewide level and has not been distributed to
   individual regions of the state. The forecast did not specifically distribute water needs
   between 2020 and 2050 as this would be highly speculative
   The PC then highlighted some general guidance to Council and made the following
   points:
        •   Even under the 2017 maximum capacity scenario 2050 demands cannot be met.
        •   The location of any additional energy capacity/generation method beyond 2017 is
            not known.
        •   Council can incorporate water withdrawal and consumption information
            associated with known and planned facilities.
        •    For energy water demands associated with power production beyond 2017
            Council may wish to look at this more qualitatively in terms of understanding the
            water resource implication if some additional power generation were to occur
            within the region.
   The PC concluded with a summary of the information that will document the energy
   forecast including: A detailed Technical Memorandum; and Executive Summary; the PPT
   and presentations to Councils; additional guidance to Council similar to the above bullets;
   and a template that can be included in the regional plan.
   CM – How is the out of state energy both in and out accounted for?
   PC- The forecast kept the relative percent in and out of the state constant over the
   planning horizon.
   CM – Which source of energy uses the least amount of water?
   PC – It is more driven by the cooling method. Wind and solar are lowest water demand.
   CM – If energy was located into our region we might need to have storage because of a
   few of our regions are close to critical low flow during dry periods.
   CM – In Altamaha we do not have some gaps what about the other regions?
   PC- Most regions do not have significant gaps other than the Flint and Suwannee-Satilla
   and some localized areas.
   CM – One big alternative would be to consider aquifer storage and recovery as a possible
   practice.
   PC – Yes this is a practice that has been used effectively in several areas including South
   Carolina.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 11
   CM – In the case of Plant Vogel how is the new expansion going to occur?
   PC – There will be more capacity added and more cooling.
   Public – Council should keep in mind that the Floridan aquifer is a dynamic system and it
   is moving and there is the potential for contamination from mineral leaching.
   PC – You do have to consider treatment and geochemical considerations.
8) Management Practices - Continued
   Groundwater
   The PC suggested that the next step in management practices refinement is to discuss fatal
   flaws in the management practices as they stand now. The Council provided additional
   feedback and the general discussion is summarized below.
   Groundwater - Add implementing this in all aquifers. Also add words to sustainably
   develop.
   Page 2 – land use practices should include all aquifer recharge areas in our region.
   Member concerned about Florida demands as discussed earlier and reemphasized that
   this should be deleted.
   Encourage land use practices – open ended. That’s pretty broad.
   Continue to monitor and improve – use science to help research – some of these practices
   (such as ASR) that we’ve talked about could be a good tool but only if it is done correctly.
   Surface water
   Water conservation – at fourth bullet – minimize or eliminate the use of high-pressure
   spray guns on fixed and traveler systems. Why change this out if there is enough water to
   support it? In west Georgia, they’ve gone to low pressure systems. Encourage efficient use
   of high pressure spray guns maybe a better way to say this. Energy and other
   requirements will take care of some of that. If you use a soft hose traveler with a four-inch
   hose pumping 550 gpm, need to have 120 pounds of pressure at the pump in order to
   drive it.
   Or maybe we should just say “encourage selected use of conservation implementation
   plan”. But we need to give more guidance and specificity then that. Committee should
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 12
   refine this and how to treat it. Encourage the development and use of the highest efficient
   irrigation systems available.
   Tier 4 – Install end-gun shutoff with pivots is a good idea.
   More research into how to water crops for the most efficient use of water. National peanut
   lab in Dalton has researched this for corn, cotton and peanuts. We could suggest
   furthering that research and expanding it to other crops.
   Modify pond operation for minimum release in dry/gap years – incent the use of surface
   water impoundments for surface water discharges in times of gap. This should be
   discussed more by the subcommittee.
   Future ponds might encourage folks to drill wells because of additional costs associated
   with pond construction.
   Direct pumping of groundwater to surface water during critical dry periods. Should not
   be considered unless it is a last resort.
   Need some wording on interbasin transfer. Not against it unless it’s detrimental to our
   region. The subcommittee should take this up.
   Possible joint reservoir – maybe we need to look at other opportunities in the future for
   reservoirs. Future research for reservoir developments throughout the area should be a
   recommended practice.
   The only way to sustain the flow in the Canoochee river is to build a reservoir in the
   headwaters and this would require a study. Look at reservoirs from a surface water
   recharge perspective, not from a population served. Might be more of them that are
   shallower. Surface water recharge reservoirs.
   Concern over ASR. Suggestion: research the pros/cons of ASR.
   Recharge of surficial aquifer is similar to incentives to restore wetlands and historically
   drained hardwood and other areas.
   What is the affect of forestry on nitrogen and phosphorus? A Council member noted that
   nobody fertilizers forested lands anymore. That used to be big, but companies can’t afford
   to do it anymore.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 13
    Better describe “consider measures to promote increased infliltration” and add
    “stormwater”.
     “limit development in floodplain.” Strike this item.
    Clarify stormwater practices – retention ponds vs infiltration
    Erosion and sedimentation controls during harvesting – mandating this is cost prohibitive
    and it is not accurately describe so either delete or reword.
    In rewording this section it would be good to state it as “Examples include” and then list
    the other bullets.
    Page 8 – clarify streams and rivers instead of ponds and work with the subcommittee on
    specific language.
    Okay on incentives for wetlands for hardwood . . . but not silviculture.
9) Shared Resources
    The PC reminded Council of the need to coordinate with other Councils on shared
    resources and handed out the list of our representatives and the shared resource issues.
    At this point we may be able to accomplish this mostly with phone calls or other
    correspondence.
10) Water Plan Development
    The PC provided an overview of the comments received from EPD on Sections 1-5 and
    discussed the preliminary submittal of Sections 6-8. Most of the comments so far were
    editorial and requested that certain section be shortened.
11) Revisit Vision and Goals
    The Council looked over the revised vision statement and generally felt it addressed the
    points raised by Mr. Hauss. A motion was made by Jim Free to adopt the revised mission
    statement in lieu of the resolution; second by John Roller. The motion was unanimously
    approved by Council.
12) Recommendations to the State
    The PC highlighted several examples of possible recommendations to the state to help in
    the implement the findings of the water plan. Examples include: supporting existing
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 14
    funding programs and programs, additional data collection, and future role of the
    Council.
    CM – Does National Resource Conservation Service and Farm Service Agency dothe Ag
    metering?
    GSWCC – The metering program is a state program and it is implemented cooperatively
    with both EPD and GSWCC.
    The Chair noted that he has met with City, County, County Commissioners, and Ag
    interests to inform them of the work of the Council. By far the Ag interests were the most
    engaged and interested. The others have so much on their plate they do not have the time
    to fully engage on the issue unless it impacts them directly.
13) Local Elected Official Comments
    There were no local elected official comments.
14) Public Comments
    Neil Herring – Addressed the Council regarding the energy forecast and pointed out the
    planned energy need for water in associated with a plant what would use water from the
    Upper Oconee. In addition if another plant is approved in Ben Hill might require water
    from the Ocmulgee. In terms of funding suggestions there have been several funds that
    legislature has reallocated to other purpose such as the general funds and encouraged
    Council to consider a Constitutional amendment to dedicate the monies collected from
    fees to stay allocated to the original purpose for which the fund was created.
15) Wrap-up and What to Expect Next Meeting
    The Council agreed to hold their next meetings in Vidalia on December 16 and January 11.
cc: Kevin Farrell, EPD
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 15
Altamaha Regional Water Council
Council Members Attendance List
    Altamaha Council Members        10/28/2010
    1     Gary Bell
    2     Randy Branch
    3     Guy Rex Bullock               X
    4     James Mark Burns
    5     Gerald A DeWitt               X
    6     Will Donaldson Jr.
    7     Cleve Edenfield               X
    8     Jim Free                      X
    9     Randy Giddens
    10    Len Hauss
    11    Edward S Jeffords             X
    12    Phillip Jennings
    13    L. Brinson Lanier             X
    14    Dan McCranie
    15    Steve Meeks
    16    Greg Morris
    17    Buddy Pittman                 X
    18    Michael A. Polsky
    19    John E. Roller                X
    20    Sue B. Sammons                X
    21    Doug Sharp
    22    Paul A. Stravriotis           X
    23    Jim E. Strickland             X
    24    Dent L. Temples               X
    25    Lindsay Thomas                X
    26    William G Tomberlin
    27    Michael Williams
    28    Tommie Williams
    29    Russ Yeomans
                              Total     13
 Altamaha Council Meeting 8 Summary
10/28/10
Page 16
Altamaha Regional Water Council
Public Attendance List
           Public Attendee         10/28/2010         Representing
   1    Deatre Denion                  X      GA DCA
   2    Don Giles                      X      GA Farm Bureau
   3    Don Harrison                   X      GA DNR - Fisheries Mgmt.
   4    Neil Herring                   X      GA Water Coalition
   5    Rahn Milligan                  X      GSWCC
   6    Harold Mobley                  X      Georgia Power
   7    Bryan Snow                     X      Georgia Forestry Comm.
                             Total     7
 