Memorandum
To:                 Altamaha Regional Water Planning Council
From:               Rick Brown and Katherine Zitsch
Date:               December 2, 2009
Subject: Council Meeting 4 Summary
This memorandum documents the meeting summary of the Altamaha Regional Water Planning
Council Meeting 4 (CM4), on November 19, 2009 at the Altamaha Technical College in Jesup.
1) Welcome and Introductions
      Chairman Brinson Lanier welcomed everyone and called the meeting to order. He then
      turned the meeting over to Ed Jeffords. Mr. Jeffords thanked everyone for coming and noted
      that Wayne County and the Altamaha Technical College were pleased to host the Altamaha
      Regional Water Council meeting. Gerald DeWitt also welcomed everyone to City of Jesup
      and thanked everyone for coming. Ed Jeffords then introduced the Wayne County
      Administrator, Mike Deal.
      Mr. Deal welcomed everyone to the City of Jesup. He noted it was good to see everyone
      volunteering their time and participating in these important issues. He further noted that
      probably one of the biggest issues will be with the legislature – we need to deal with
      important issues with our two neighboring states and deal with water issues in Atlanta.
      Mr. Deal stated that there is an excellent water resource in the Floridan Aquifer and that
      Jesup, GA has one of the cheapest water rates in the state (his bill is $22/month). He
      constantly hears from people, though, that think their water bill was too high, especially
      during the early spring when everyone wants to water their lawn.
      Chairman Lanier added a comment about the Governor’s water contingency task force. He
      noted that the judge’s ruling about Lake Lanier is going to have adverse affects in 2012. The
      contingency tasks force has met and will meet again. There are many suggestions on the
      board such as more reservoirs (six at this point), maybe using some abandoned rock
      quarries, more and more water conservation, piping water, and desalinization. There is an
      urgency in this process because the judge’s ruling takes affect at a certain date. He told the
      council members that if they have any ideas, to call their legislators or any chairman of any
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 2
      water council. He welcomed any ideas – including that when any industry comes, they
      should send it a little further South.
      The Planning Contractor (PC) then provided an overview of what was accomplished during
      Council Meeting 3, including identifying Region-specific water resources vision and goals to
      assist in future evaluation of water resources management practices, reviewing population
      status and discussing its use in water needs forecasts, reviewing draft complete agricultural
      water needs forecasts and discussing industrial water demands, discussing management
      practice concepts and planning resources, and an overview of Altamaha regional
      groundwater. The PC provided an overview of the survey results from CM3 and then stated
      the goals for CM4: build on resource assessment information presented at CM3, discuss the
      results of work and plan for Joint Meetings, review Municipal and Industrial Water and
      Wastewater Forecast Methodology and Status, continue Management Practices discussion
      with Region-specific examples of current and potential future practices, update and adopt
      the Region’s Vision and Goals, and adopt the Region’s Public Involvement Plan.
      Chairman Lanier then noted that everyone should have received CM3’s meeting summary.
      Lindsay Thomas motioned that the summary of that meeting be approved as is; the motion
      was seconded by Jim Free. Chairman Lanier asked if there was any further discussion and
      then the meeting summary was approved with no opposition.
      Chairman Lanier then noted that the Council should have the proposed agenda. Ed Jeffords
      motioned that the agenda be approved as is, John Roller seconded. Chairman Lanier asked
      if there was any further discussion and then the agenda was approved with no opposition.
      The PC noted that there was a welcome letter from the new EPD Director, Allen Barnes, at
      every Council member’s seat as well as an overview of water law in Georgia. The PC also
      reviewed the status of the Governor’s contingency planning task force. The Governor
      formed the Water Contingency Task Force as part of an overall response to Judge
      Magnuson's July ruling regarding Lake Lanier. The task force met for the first time on
      October 7th. They will hold two more meetings and present recommendations before the
      January 2010 legislative session.
2) Update/Adopt Council Vision and Goals Statements
      The PC stated the vision was adopted at the last meeting and that the PC has worked with a
      subcommittee since then on goals. Ed Jeffords and the PC reported out on the work of the
      subgroup. Ed made several suggestions for grouping similar goals into categories. The PC
      noted that the goals should support the vision statement and will be used in selection of
      management practices and to help communicate to other Councils and policy makers what
      is important to the Altamaha regions in regard to water resources.
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 3
      A discussion was held on whether it was the Council’s job to manage and protect resources
      versus encouraging the management and protection of resources. In addition, the Council
      suggested that the goals could be narrowed down and combined. Chairman Lanier clarified
      that we provide direction to the State of Georgia, but they implement the plan – whether it
      is EPD or legislature or DNR – it will not be the council’s responsibility to implement the
      plan.
      The PC pointed out that the vision and goals for the region is a living document. Anything
      we approve today, we can change as we go through the planning process. If we are not
      satisfied with anything we put in our documents, we have power to change them at future
      meetings.
      Kevin Farrell noted that EPD and the Council are in a long term partnership with open lines
      of communication are key going forward in terms of what we are doing and what we think
      the council is doing.
      A Council member noted that while we are developing policy, we want to be specific
      enough that EPD manages it as we intended. EPD needs to manage things with each group
      in mind. That overall plan will be reflective in each region’s vision.
      Chairman Lanier noted that we could work on it through the day with the subcommittee to
      address the comments and re-present the goals this afternoon.
3) Water Plan Table of Contents
      The PC presented information that in the upcoming month, they would like to work with
      the Council to develop a draft Table of Contents for the water plan report. Guidelines for
      this will be provided by EPD so that the plans are consistent across regions. The PC would
      also like to work with the Council to have members review initial draft sections of the
      report. Chairman Lanier asked for a subcommittee to help with this initiative. The following
      members volunteered: Paul Stravriotis, Will Donaldson, and Gerald Dewitt.
4) Begin Discussion of Energy/Thermoelectric Power Forecasts
      The PC presented the general approach that will be used for the Energy/Thermoelectric
      power forecasts. The approach involves considering fuel types and potential locations for
      future power plants based on projected energy needs. A consultant and EPD will work with
      power producers to help with this effort.
      A Council member noted that the plan should consider if power production will be placed
      in areas outside the state. A discussion was held on the amount of water withdrawn for
      power production and how that water is used/consumptive use. The PC noted that future
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 4
      presentations can be given on the technical aspects of power production and water use.
      Kevin Farrell noted that Georgia Power indicates they return about 95% of their total
      withdrawals. He also confirmed that a power plant is going through the permitting process
      to be located in Washington City.
5) Municipal and Industrial Water and Wastewater Demand Forecasts
      The Planning Contractor (PC) presented water use on the municipal and industrial side.
      They are being presented so that the Council can comment on where they do not look right
      so that the PC can do additional follow up. We are focusing mostly on water use and will
      discuss how population and employment tie in once the population projection are released
      by Office of Planning and Budget/Governors Office.
      Municipal water demand includes residential, commercial and light industries. The goal is
      to develop preliminary county level per capita use rates (public and self supplied). EPD’s
      goal is to have a county specific number, but they are flexible to allow regional adjustments.
      We could end up with a weighted average for the region rather than individual numbers.
      A council member asked if there is a formula for self-supplied water use. The PC noted that
      right now, we are showing just municipal. There is limited date for Self-supplied use
      because it is not routinely measured. The source of data is not extensive; the USGS
      recommendation is to use 75 gallons per capita day (gpcd). There was discussion at the last
      meeting whether that was low.
      A council member asked if municipal use includes commercial, light industrial, and
      household use? The PC noted that for an overall system, it does, but not for individual
      household wells.
      A subcommittee was formed to discuss water demand. Gerald DeWitt, Ed Jeffords, John
      Roller, Jim Free and Brinson Lanier will participate.
      Dent Temples noted that there was a significant leak that occurred in 2005 and that might
      affect the per capita water use. So maybe some of the higher numbers are that systems do
      not actively manage their leaks. It was further noted that Johnson County includes a prison.
      A council member noted that Montgomery County data are flawed because Mt. Vernon has
      40 percent of the population and our use is 160 gpcd. By this information, the other five
      cities would only use 24 gallons per capita per day. Montgomery County needs to be more
      like 160 gpd.
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 5
      It was noted that the numbers show total water withdrawals/pumped per capita and
      generally 85 percent is a good figure for actual usage – there are 15 percent unmetered
      uses/losses.
      A council member asked what the numbers will be used to produce. The PC responded that
      these will be used along with 2005 population to determine county water usage and
      wastewater generation. Then, we will take the population forward with these rates to
      forecast total future water need.
      A council member noted that population served is the key component here, and it should be
      considered how percent population served will change moving forward.
      A council member suggested to each county representative on the council – in relation to the
      region specific factors that will be fine tuning these projections – if you are aware of some
      new industrial demand or residential demand in your county, you need to bring that kind
      of information so that we can get it out and include in this process.
      It was suggested that Metropolitan Atlanta should send industry southward. As we are
      planning this process, we may not be able to note which county industry will land in, but
      the Altamaha region will experience/should plan for 10-20 percent growth.
      The PC asked if Appling County has land application? A council member said no, so the PC
      noted that we need to review this information in the database.
      A council member noted that an infiltration and inflow (I&I) study for Wayne County is
      more than 40 percent. The representative said they have much higher I&I in the coastal plain
      and so we need to revisit this factor because of soil types and topography (high water table,
      old infrastructure, very flat slope).
      EPD commented that 40 percent seems very high and that issue should be addressed rather
      than planning for high I&I. The County would not need additional treatment capacity if
      they fix I&I. The council member noted they are working on it.
      A council member notes that flows also depend on where and how a system is metering
      outflow. When there are heavy rains for 3-4 days and they are using a retention pond
      system, the system is going to exceed its permit, but not necessarily with wastewater.
      The PC noted that the next steps are to get together with the ad hoc group. They will be
      developing forecasts in January and February and preliminary forecasts will be presented at
      the next meeting.
      A question was asked related to how this will change over next 40 years – are there large
      industries we know are coming? Absent of that, the limitation of this approach is that what
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 6
      we see in the past is what we see in future. Do we need to be thoughtful qualitatively that
      there may be additional mix of industries that would come into region that would not come
      in today? Kevin Farrell responded that something like that in plan would not dictate how
      EPD permits future facilities. If an industry comes, just because it’s not in the plan will not
      keep EPD from permitting it.
      A council member noted that we want industries to come here. We have good water
      supplies and they would help this region economically. The Council could state in the plan
      that this is something we would like to see happen.
6) Guest Presentation - Rayonier Inc., Industrial Water User in the Region
      A presentation was made by Rayonier staff regarding their plant, products, and water use.
      Rayonier is in the forest products industry. They have 1,800 employees in nine states and on
      five continents and have three core businesses: performance fibers, timber, and real estate.
      Jesup’s mill is the world’s largest dissolving kraft mill and a global leader in cellulose
      specialties.
      Water is critical to achieving the purity Rayonier’s customers require. They look at
      opportunities to improve environmentally. Between 1980 and 2009, they have decreased
      water use by 36 percent per ton of product. Every gallon of water that comes to the mill is
      used at least five times before it is treated and discharged.
      A council member asked whether the Jesup mill withdraws water from the aquifer and
      discharges it into a river? Rayonier responded that it comes from the Floridan Aquifer and
      ultimately is discharged back to the Altamaha River.
      A council member asked why not withdraw it from the river? The Rayonier representative
      asked Gerald DeWitt to respond since he was more familiar with the answer. Mr. DeWitt
      responded that the primary reason is that the river water quality varies over the year and
      treatment to achieve a pure water supply is very challenging. In 1953/1954, Rayonier found
      it more efficient to go to groundwater since water quality is such a major influence on their
      product and it is hard for the plant to deal with quality changes. When developing the third
      mill, the State encouraged Rayonier to use additional groundwater. There is a plan
      maintained and evaluated for moving to surface water supply, but disposing of the sludge
      from the highly turbid water would be a major challenge.
      A council member asked what the long term outlook is for the paper industry in Georgia?
      The Rayonier representative responded that it is hard to speak for industry, but the paper
      industry is in a real struggle. International Paper just announced the closure of a number of
      mills in the US. There is a complete exit of the industry in the northwestern US and now
      they are beginning to see a lot more of that in other parts of the country. We have a
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 7
      competitor in Brazil with 300,000 tons of capacity. They have a brand new mill with the
      most efficient technology. The Brazilian workforce is a cheaper workforce and Brazilians are
      good at growing eucalyptus trees which grow faster, so they have better supply. It is hard to
      predict where we will be 5-10 years from now. As they develop economically, the playing
      field will level out some.
      Is demand for paper down due to electronic storage? This was a key issue for the
      International Paper mill in Franklin, VA that closed. They sold reams of paper. The
      electronic age is driving that down. Rayonier is fortunate because most of our business is in
      the flat to modest growth range because we do not create paper.
      A council member noted that the wood fuels industry is one that a lot of people think
      provides real hope. He asked whether Rayonier sees that as ultimate competition or is there
      a way for companies to shift into it? The Rayonier representative responded that he just
      came back from three days of senior management meetings, and that was key topic of
      discussion. Yes, they do think there is a lot of opportunity, they do think it will create
      competition for resources. Rayonier has benefits and impacts on both ends of that spectrum
      because their wood production in the Southeast is almost equal to their wood consumption.
      We are trying to figure out how to maximize the benefit for Rayonier – we do expect
      bioenergy to increase and it will drive up the cost for trees. A lot of work is being done in
      Washington D.C. to incent biomass-to-energy infrastructure. There is concern about doing
      this really fast and the potential unintended consequences.
      A council member asked “It is easy to see rebuilding of softwood forests, but what about
      hardwood?” Rayonier did a study and hardwoods in the Southeast require 50-60 years for
      regeneration. It takes a lot more land to support hardwood since softwood takes only 16 – 20
      years. We depend on natural reforestation. There are some companies experimenting with
      eucalyptus, but it is not cold temperature tolerant. There are still genetic efforts to make this
      work. We could see it in the southeast in this lifetime, but not at a commercial level yet.
7) Regional Water Resources Overview – PC
      The PC then provided a brief overview of the type of water resources information that will
      be provided to the Council and included in the plan. The presentation highlighted water
      withdrawal by type and purpose, water quality considerations including impaired waters
      and reason for impairment. A council member asked if low rainfall can impact dissolved
      oxygen and the PC responded that yes, it can result in lower DO.
8) Dr. Jim Kennedy – “Resource Assessments – Current and Future Conditions Assessments
      and Modeling Tools for Groundwater”
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 8
      Dr. Jim Kennedy, the State Geologist of Georgia, presented an overview of the groundwater
      resource assessment and an initial overview of Georgia’s Major groundwater aquifers,
      highlighting the Floridan aquifer. He noted that where aquifers outcrop, groundwater will
      go in and will move through the aquifers, getting recharge from above and below. Before
      man started pumping, the groundwater would ultimately discharge vertically upward
      through a confining unit into the ocean. There used to be freshwater springs off of the coast
      of Georgia; there are still freshwater springs off the coast of Florida.
      In the counties in the Northwestern part of the region, the aquifer elevation is 200 feet above
      sea level (ASL), in the western portion the levels are 400 ft ASL. Everything is getting deeper
      as you go towards the ocean. The aquifer thickness is from 100 – 300 feet in the west and
      1,000 feet in the west. The aquifer is at a much higher elevation in the west than the east and
      is fairly thin in west and much thicker in the eastern portion. Recharge occurs in areas of
      unconfined upper Floridan Aquifer (outcrop area). For most of region, though it is confined.
      Recharge along river valleys is considered leakage through the confining unit. Recharge
      could be as high as 3 to 4 inches per year in some of the river valleys. Recharge through the
      confining unit is roughly half the recharge rate if it is in an outcrop area and getting rainfall
      directly into the system (6 inches per year). It would be like having 3 to 4 inches at a specific
      location and it would occur across the region.
      Dr. Kennedy presented groundwater level graphs from the region. He noted that what is
      important is that the Upper Floridan Aquifer does not behave the same everywhere.
      He noted that the presenter before was from Rayonier and he talked about pulling water
      from the aquifer and discharging it to river. A question could be raised, wouldn’t that lower
      the aquifer? Actually, what it does – if you have seen the cone of depression that we have in
      some areas of the state – there is a cone of depression around the wells that Rayonier uses to
      withdraw groundwater. It is a localized cone of depression, but it is shown in figures. Once
      they put the water back into the Altamaha River, the Altamaha is not in direct hydraulic
      connection to the Upper Floridan. So basically, they are taking it out of aquifer and adding it
      back to the river. It looked like on graphs Wayne County had not dropped as much as other
      areas. The Wayne County well is not affected by the cone of depression.
      A council member asked if by pumping out of the aquifer, are we short-circuiting the
      natural process? Well, the natural process is that the flow will discharge to the ocean. If it
      were not pumped, it would discharge to the ocean anyway. This is just taking it out of the
      aquifer and getting it into the river.
      A council member noted that his farm is on the east side of Wayne County. His well is one
      of the oldest wells for irrigation – 1954. It is 900 feet deep. In 1989 , it cavitated and they had
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 9
      to go to the 950 foot level. What they found when it quit pumping was that they could wait
      2-3 days and pump again, but it would stop again.
      Dr. Kennedy noted that tracer studies are not performed in these areas. Tracers are
      commonly used for the rate of contamination movement, but there are other methods for
      determining aquifer characteristics.
      The groundwater work is being conducted using MODFLOW because these models are user
      friendly. They are very large, multi layer models that included all of the aquifers that were
      prioritized. We simulated increasing pumping in both existing wells and simulated wells
      (added to model) to see how the aquifer responded to increased pumping throughout the
      aquifer.
      Sustainable yield is defined as how much groundwater we can get out of an aquifer without
      creating an undesirable affect or impact. For these models, sustainable yield benchmarks
      were defined as:
      -     Drawdowns of groundwater levels between pumping wells in the pumped aquifer do
            not exceed 30 feet so as not to affect nearby wells
      -     Do not decrease stream flow below 60 percent of the mean annual discharge during
            April to September and 40 percent during October to March (Tennant method
            “outstanding” flow to maintain a health aquatic ecosystem)
      -     Over time the reduction in aquifer storage becomes asymptotic to a new base level
      -     Do not lower groundwater levels below the top of a confined aquifer (thereby making
            the aquifer unconfined)
      -     Do not exceed the ability of the aquifer to recover to baseline groundwater levels
            between periods or higher pumping during droughts
      A council member asked how the Upper Floridan aquifer looks today versus 30 years ago?
      Depends on where you are. In some places it has gone down and in some places it has
      stayed the same. There are different conditions in different parts of aquifer.
      A council member noted that as a young man, we used to have springs along the Ocmulgee
      River, but they are now gone. Dr. Kennedy noted that this is due to a drop in the water table
      in the surficial or cretaceous aquifers. The cretaceous aquifer at Jackson County has gone
      down.
      The council member asked if that means we are not sustaining that aquifer? Dr. Kennedy
      answered that it means we have changed the interactions between the groundwater and
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 10
      surface water aquifers. Springs are funny because it depends on site specific geology and
      hydrogeology.
      About 8 percent of aquifer is exposed to direct rainfall recharge. We have not quantified the
      river portion of recharge.
      A council member asked whether the saltwater intrusion problem was due to pumping or
      lack of recharge? Dr. Kennedy answered it was due to localized pumping.
      Dr. Kennedy noted that we are looking at how we are affecting each other related to
      pumping aquifers. SC and FL have given us data to use as part of our models. The aquifer
      does cross state boundaries. Pumping in Fernandina Beach affects St. Mary’s. Of course, the
      pumping in St. Mary’s affects that more.
      There are mathematical calculations that are built using specific information on the
      geometery of aquifers, with very specifically measured parameters. Then the models were
      calibrated until the model accurately predicts water levels actually measured in wells. We
      have very high confidence in the models. The model is very accurately predicting what is
      going on in the aquifer.
      Where the Ocmulgee and Oconnee start in the Piedmont, they run across the Cretaceous
      and Floridan aquifers. If groundwater is not discharging to the river, then the river is
      recharging the aquifer in those locations.
      The goal is to be able to use the model as needed without creating an adverse affect down
      the road. A council member asked if these benchmarks will do just that? Dr. Kennedy
      responded that they are what our project team has come up with as an initial set of
      sustainable yield benchmarks. If someone wanted to change the benchmarks, we could take
      a look at the outcome.
      A council member asked if those benchmarks are not being met, what happens to the end
      user? Dr. Kennedy responded, “Let’s say the aquifer is being pumped at 100 mgd and let’s
      say this benchmark was not met. Then, you have to work backwards to see if it needs to be
      90, 80, 70 mgd.” A council member then asked what happens if that is due to agricultural
      use? Dr. Kennedy responded that is a policy issue and his job is to determine the sustainable
      yield.
      Dr. Kennedy noted that the model addresses the seasonal variation of pumping due to
      agriculture.
      Dr. Kennedy then presented on the Coastal Sound Science Initiative modeling project. For
      that project, the consultant simulated the extent of the plume at the northern end of Hilton
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 11
      Head Island and then looked at management scenarios. As we change pumping rates in
      Savannah and Hilton Head Island, how will we change shape of plume?
      Dr. Kennedy noted that as all water is headed to the ocean one way or another. As you go
      deeper into an aquifer, the hydraulic pressure higher, which forces water up through units
      to get to sea level. If you get a water level drop in one aquifer, there is not necessarily an
      equivalent water level drop in a different aquifer. If the hydraulic connection is poor, the
      aquifers could react differently. It depends on how they are connected and where they are
      connected.
      A council member asked how far into the ocean does the aquifer go? Dr. Kennedy answered
      that the boundary goes 60-80 miles; geologic units extend far offshore.
      Dr. Kennedy noted that if you put a well in and pump out 1,000 gallons per minute,
      confined aquifers restore the pressure and the water. They are not like the surficial aquifer,
      where you are drawing water out. As long as there is pressure in system, the system will
      repressurize quickly.
      Because of the complexity of different aquifers and the way they are recharged, it is difficult
      to come up with recharge rates and sustainable yield. The model can put boundaries on it –
      we would find out that groundwater withdrawals were at sustainable yield, above the
      sustainable yield, or higher than what is being withdrawn. What the model are initially
      suggesting – and this is not for all aquifers – is that it appears that sustainable yield is higher
      than what is currently being withdrawn. If it is higher, it is going to be higher by different
      amounts for different aquifers.
      As a planning process, we are trying to understand how much water we can take out of the
      aquifer system without causing adverse impacts. A council member asked if say the yield in
      our area for the Upper Floridan Aquifer is X – do you also address the inter-connectivities?
      Dr. Kennedy responded yes, one of the things that the consultant did was to run the
      regional model to see how the individual aquifers affect each other and lowered the
      sustainable yields of each accordingly based on pumping of others.
      A council member asked whether we know whether we are pulling more water out of the
      Upper Floridan than is being recharged? Dr. Kennedy answer that it appears for some
      aquifers, the amount withdrawn is less than the sustainable yield. In those cases, no, you are
      withdrawing less than is being recharged. This is not true in some areas in the Coastal
      Region.
      A council member asked whether any of the Hilton Head Island areas include recharge? The
      consultant is modeling reductions in withdrawals. Sea level has risen 0.8 feet since the late
      1880’s when withdrawals started. There was a question as to whether sea level rise could
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 12
      have an impact on the aquifers; the USGS determined the rise is inconsequential in
      comparison to rates of withdrawal.
9) Finalize January Joint Meeting Preparation
      The PC made a presentation on the joint meetings. The presentation included the schedule
      and a draft agenda for each meeting. It was noted that three of the meeting directly apply to
      the Altamaha Council, but council members can attend any of the six meetings. The PC
      handed out a signup list for the joint meetings to get a sense of who would be attending the
      meetings.
10) Finalize and Adopt Public Involvement Plan
      PC noted that a subcommittee worked on the public involvement plan over the course of the
      period between CM3 and CM4. Sue Sammons presented the results of that plan. Ed Jeffords
      made a motion to adopt the public involvement plan as is. Rex Bullock seconded the
      motion. The motion carried without opposition.
11) Finalize goals
      Ed Jeffords presented revised goals based on the work of the subcommittee during lunch to
      address the morning’s council comments. John Roller moved to accept the goals as revised
      and Buddy Pittman seconded. All were in favor, with no opposition, so the motion passed.
12) Non-Permitted Agricultural Water Demand
      The PC provided an update on non-permitted agricultural water demand. Cliff Lewis, EPD
      is working with several agricultural stakeholders to identify sub-100,000 gallons per day
      agricultural users to gather information on water use and that information will be presented
      at the next meeting. The key is that they are looking to document existing uses. They do not
      have a viable method for projecting forward.
13) Management Practices
      The PC then provided a presentation on management practices. The role of the planning
      councils will be to plan for the region and coordinate with local governments and utilities.
      At the end of the day, the concept is that identify future needs and any gaps between
      current and future needs, review relevant existing water plans and studies, and then we will
      determine what types of management practices may be needed to address future needs. It
      is possible that we may identify the need for several types of practices so in the end we may
      have a portfolio or suite of water management practices.
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 13
      Ultimately, the PC will assist the Council with writing a plan that can be approved by
      council. Once approved it goes to EPD for their review. If EPD has comments they will
      need to be addressed if not then it becomes the initial plan for the region. A council member
      stated that some areas of the state will not be on the sustainable level and some may. He
      asked whether we lose our identity on the state water plan or will it be region specific? The
      PC answered that as it stands now, the initial phase will be an Altamaha plan. The question
      EPD is thinking about is from those plans, as they draw out key findings, will there be a
      summary document for the whole state. The regional plans stay as a document, with the key
      findings going to the state level. Each basin will have key findings and recommendations
      that will be unique to us.
      It was clarified the legislature adopted a state water plan which is a framework document
      that sets into motion the process to develop regional plans. It lays out regional water
      planning councils, the need to create vision and goals, the public involvement plan, etc. It is
      the blueprint to create our plan.
      The PC noted that if there are specific plans or sources of documentation, Council members
      should notify the PC of these. PCs will look to EPD and Council and the Local Government
      Advisory Body, ACCG and GMA to notify them of near term projects in pipeline. From a
      project standpoint, a council member suggested that each community has Industrial
      Development Authority (IDA) and we ought to outreach to those authorities. Many times
      elected officials do not know all that is going on.
      The PC noted that part of the role of the ad hoc group will be to help us do this outreach and
      to identify which water providers we absolutely need to do additional outreach and where
      additional data refinement is needed. A Council member reiterated that the regional IDAs
      and community IDAs is a good place to start.
      A council member noted that the Governor’s water contingency task force may have options
      that affect every region.
14) Local Elected Official Comments
      There were no local elected official comments.
15) Public Comments
      There were no public comments.
16) Wrap Up, What to Expect Next Meeting
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 14
      The next steps include the resource assessment results being available in January 2010. We
      will start initial discussion, selection, and refinement of management practices in CM 5, 6,
      and 7. Selection should be finalized by December 2010.
      January we will have the results of the resource assessments.
      The next meeting will be held on March 23, 2010 at Plant Hatch if available. The plan will be
      to go to Little Ocmulgee State Park for the May meeting.
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 15
Altamaha Regional Water Council
Council Members Attendance List
       Altamaha Council Members                                     11/19/2009
       1          Gary Bell                                                X
       2          Randy Branch
       3          Guy Rex Bullock                                          X
       4          James Mark Burns
       5          Gerald A DeWitt                                          X
       6          Will Donaldson Jr.                                       X
       7          Cleve Edenfield                                          X
       8          Jim Free                                                 X
       9          Randy Giddens
      10          Len Hauss                                                X
      11          Edward S Jeffords                                        X
      12          Phillip Jennings
      13          L. Brinson Lanier                                        X
      14          Dan McCranie
      15          Steve Meeks                                              X
      16          Greg Morris
      17          Buddy Pittman                                            X
      18          Michael A. Polsky
      19          John E. Roller                                           X
      20          Sue B. Sammons                                           X
      21          Doug Sharp                                               X
      22          Paul A. Stravriotis                                      X
      23          Jim E. Strickland                                        X
      24          Dent L. Temples                                          X
      25          Lindsay Thomas                                           X
      26          William G Tomberlin                                      X
      27          Michael Williams                                         X
      28          Tommie Williams
      29          Russ Yeomans                                             X
                                                     Totals               21
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 Altamaha Council Meeting 4
December 2, 2009
Page 16
Altamaha Regional Water Council
Public Attendance List
                  Public Attendee                                   11/19/2009                               Representing
       1          Brian Baker                                              X            EPD
       2          Deatre Denion                                           X             GA DCA
       6          Kimberly Edge                                           X             Treutlen County Commissioners
       7          Ted Evans                                                X            Georgia Farm Bureau
       8          Don Giles                                                X            Georgia Farm Bureau
       9          Don Harrison                                            X             GA DNR - Fisheries Mgmt
      11          Neill Herring                                            X            GA Water Coalition
      12          Belinda Johnson                                         X             Oglethorpe Power
      13          Jim Kennedy                                              X            Georgia EPD
      15          Alison McGee                                             X            The Nature Conservancy
      16          Rahn Milligan                                            X            GSWCC
      16          Lynn Nichols                                             X            USDA-NRCS
      17          Phil Odom                                                X            Coastal Georgia Water Council
      18          Janet Price                                             X             Rayonier
      19          Shanda Thompson                                         X             USDA/NRCS
      18          Jason Wisniewski                                         X            GA DNR WRD - Nongame
                                                     Totals               16
O:\Georgia Regional Water Plan\Meetings\Council Meeting 4\Meeting Summaries\ALT\Altamaha Meeting 4 Summary.doc  
 