Memorandum
To:          Altamaha Regional Water Planning Council
From:        Rick Brown and Katherine Zitsch, CDM
Date:        08/24/10
Subject: Council Meeting 7 - Summary
This memorandum provides the meeting summary of the Altamaha Regional Water Planning
Council Meeting 7 (CM 7), held on August 24, 2010 at Georgia State Prison, Wardens Guest
House, Reidsville.
1) Welcome and Introductions/Recap CM 6/Approve Agenda/Approve CM6 Summary
   Chairman Brinson Lanier called the meeting to order. The Council was welcomed by
   Warden Brad Hooks (Rogers State Prison) and Warden Donald Jarriel (Georgia State
   Prison) and the Council was provided with an overview of both the correctional facilities
   in Reidsville. The Council was invited to participate in a tour of the food production and
   packaging facilities including: farming, swine, and dairy operations and the food canning
   facility. A tour was arranged for the end of the day following the formal council meeting.
   The PC provided an overview of the agenda and discussed the timing of activities over
   the next several months. October 28th was proposed as the preferred date for the Council
   Meeting 8 with November 4th as a possible backup date. The PC mentioned that Council
   Meeting 9 will likely be in early to mid December.
   The PC then discussed the results of the last meeting which, based on the meeting
   evaluation, was reported useful or very useful to the Council. The PC then discussed the
   meeting summary and asked if there were any comments on the summary. Chairman
   Lanier indicated that there had been some concerns expressed regarding the resolution
   regarding fisheries and fishing that came up near the end of Council Meeting 6 and
   pointed out that there may be a conflict with how to interpret the resolution within the
   context of the Councils existing Vision and Goals. Chairman Lanier pointed out the
   existing vision and goals identify protection of natural systems and environmental and
   recreational needs of the region. It was acknowledged that the words fish or fishing is not
   specifically mentioned and if necessary they could be added.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 2
   A Council Member (CM): Mentioned that he was curious what the objective of the
   resolution was/is and that the resolution by itself does not take into consideration the
   other needs of the region that are included in the Vision and Goals. Another Council
   member mentioned that since the motion was made by Council Member Len Hauss (Len
   was absent due to illness) and that perhaps the Council should revisit the resolution when
   Mr. Hauss is able to discuss the topic.
   The PC asked the Council for a motion to approve the meeting summary with the
   understanding that the topic of the resolution would be revisited at CM 8; Cleve Edenfield
   moved to accept the summary; Ed Jeffords seconded the motion. The Council
   unanimously approved the meeting summary.
   Next John Roller made a motion to approve the agenda and Sue Sammons seconded the
   motion; Council unanimously approved the agenda.
   The meeting continued with a more detailed overview of the objectives for Council
   Meeting 7. These included:
       •   Review resource assessment model results to identify and refine water and
           wastewater needs/gaps;
       •   Develop and refine management practices to address water availability and
           wastewater needs and gaps (Subcommittee report out);
       •   Review and prioritize current water quality impairment information and list of
           impaired segments and the status of Total Maximum Daily Load Plans;
       •   Discuss Subcommittee work on Water Plan development, and plan development
           review process; and
       •   Develop a deeper understanding of water resource dependent ecosystems in the
           region - Georgia Wildlife Resources Division Presentation
   The PC then proceeded to the next major agenda item.
2) Quantification of Gaps and Needs
   The PC described the work that has been undertaken by the Management Practices
   Subcommittee since the last Council meeting. The PC noted that the Subcommittee
   members have been invaluable in helping provide general input and direction on the
   technical work. However, final decisions and recommendations will come from full
   Council. Today’s agenda item will bring the Council up to speed on the work completed
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 3
   to date and there will be several full Council action items identified to help move the
   process forward and begin the management practices selection process.
   The PC then provided and overview of a detailed handout that summarizes: regional
   forecast data; preliminary findings for the region for groundwater, surface water, and
   water quality; preliminary management practices to address gaps between available
   resource and forecasted need; and detailed water, wastewater, and water quality
   information at the County and/or river reach level. The PC outlined for the Council the
   overall summary information and showed a single county to highlight what information
   is presented and how to interpret the various information and data sources. A copy of the
   handout can also be obtained from the Council Meeting 7 portion on the EPD website.
   CM: In regard to the surface water gap at the Atkinson Node on the Satilla River; I am
   familiar with this area near Wayne County and there are swamps that flow into the Satilla
   above Atkinson and just last week I was there and there was no discernable flow in the
   little Satilla. From the analysis that has been done I am wondering has anything we’ve
   done made it go dry more frequently or for longer?
   PC: This is the crux of the work we have ahead of us. The surface water resource
   assessment evaluated how off stream uses have impacted surface water flows during
   critical dry year conditions. If off stream uses reduces these low flow periods (7 day low
   flow for each month that occurs 1 in 10 years or the cumulative unimpaired daily flow,
   whichever is less) or makes them occur more frequently then there is a gap between
   available resource and off stream water need. Council’s next steps are to identify the
   potential causes of these gaps and develop management practices to address these gaps.
   CM: What happens to small streams that feed the creeks? I have at least two creeks that
   are gone. That creek is flowing underground. How much of our water is still there but
   flows underground as leaves and things fill up our creeks? We have so much woodland
   and trees along creeks.
   PC: Our challenge is to find ways to address critical low flows and understand to the best
   of our ability the most effective way to address these low flows. It is possible that changes
   in flow are related to other variables besides water use.
   CM: What types of action can we recommend; we don’t want to stop people from using
   water.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 4
   PC: This will be a Council driven decision several options are provided in your summary
   and you will need to review this and provide your input on those management practices
   that are effective and have a high potential of successful implementation. Possible options
   include but are not limited to demand reduction, replacement sources such as
   groundwater, changes in return flow (please see the Council Handout for more detail).
   The PC also discussed several of the challenges regarding where surface water use occurs
   at the sub-county level. For example in Wayne County surface water use is associated
   with agricultural use and that use occurs in both the Satilla watershed and the Altamaha
   watershed. This will make a difference in terms of where management practices will be
   needed and to what level they may need to be implemented.
3) Management Practices Discussion –
   The Council then spent about 15 minutes reviewing the handout and discussing the
   information among themselves. Following this informal work session the Council then
   convened as a full group. The PC encouraged the Council members to take the
   information home and share the information with their local governments, water provides
   and other stakeholders. The information will help you as a Council show where we are in
   the planning process and provide the opportunity to share ideas on management
   practices, plans and projects that are needed to meet future needs and address gaps. The
   PC mentioned that this portion of the planning process will be the main focus of our
   remaining work and is a vital part of the water plan and we will send a reminder email to
   make sure all Council members provide input. As we finalize this portion of our planning
   effort we must work toward a balanced solution with sufficient detail to be meaningful. If
   we are too generic and broad then we will not be as effective.
   CM: What type of outreach have we been doing?
   PC: We send meeting information with dates, location, and agenda to the Local
   Government Advisory Board (LGAB) (Mayors and County Commission Chairs, designees
   to LGAB that have been developed, and interested parties list, and “other” governmental
   officials list.
   CM: Many of the gaps are on tributaries. Is the Council considering draining ponds?
   PC: That could be an option to consider but it probably does not meet our regional vision
   and goals, would be difficult to implement and would have an adverse impact on local
   communities.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 5
    CM: Regarding industrial waste water many of the systems went from point source to
    LAS has that had a negative impact?
    PC: It would be hard to separate out specific issues. We do know the basic changes of
    those that have gone to LAS.
    CM: Would it be possible for some farm ponds to be done in a manner that do not use
    surface water when certain flow levels occur. You could require an identification of an
    alternate source of supply to help sustain river flows when certain river flow levels occur
    and utilize some groundwater inflows and release stored water if an alternate source was
    available.
    PC: Yes those are the types of ideas that we need to explore and flesh out.
    CM: We are being asked to address gaps. If there is a current gap how do we fix these
    given current use?
    PC: We have to address gaps but also need to address adverse impacts. Improved data
    collection and model improvement may also be needed.
    CM: Is there a program to move surface water to ground?
    PC: Yes that may be a viable option.
    CM: Are there other areas of the state that have similar problems.
    PC: Yes the Suwannee-Satilla, Coastal Georgia and other regions such as the Flint have
    and will need to address these types of issues.
    CM: We have an asset that is water. We need to protect the resources and grow our
    communities economically. It’s a balance.
4) Guest Presentation – Mr. Don Harrison, Fisheries Biologist, Georgia Department of
    Natural Resources, Wildlife Resources Division – Developing a deeper understanding of water
    resource dependant ecosystems in the Region
Mr. Harrision presented information regarding aquatic resources in the region highlighting
several points:
Hydrologic variability and yearly flow variation on the Altamaha at Doctortown including
low flows that some rivers experience in extreme drought where there is flow that is only at
or below aquatic subsistence flow level. Mr. Harrison showed some examples of flow
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 6
conditions at higher flow highlighting the functions that are achieved (i.e., spawning,
recharge flood plain, exchange of nutrients, change channel morphology etc.). He also
highlighted some examples of different ecological species that benefit from different flow
levels and how population of sunfish varied in the Altamaha during low versus higher flows.
Mr. Harrison then noted some data on economic benefits of fisheries both recreational and
commercial; including some of the fishing tournaments that attract people to the region.
Mr. Harrison then highlighted several species; including mussels, and mentioned that several
species are fairly rare species on the Altamaha which is one of the largest and watersheds and
longer unimpounded rivers in the east. Mr. Harrison presented some optional ideas about
different flow options related to Georgia’s Instream Flow Policy and mentioned a few ideas to
improve river flows including water conservation; return water near the location of
withdrawal; direct withdrawals versus storage; impairment; identify high priority streams for
conservation where environmental flows are especially important for the protection of aquatic
life.
5) Guest Presentation – Mr. Kevin Kelly, Georgia Environmental Finance Authority (GEFA)
     – Overview of GEFA Funding Programs
Mr. Kelly thanked the Council for the opportunity to discuss GEFA and gave a short
overview of GEFA highlighting their funding programs and the types and purposes of
various funding sources and entities. Mr. Kelly included information on the funding options
available and key agency and contacts. An overview of the key points made by Mr. Kelly are
summarized below:
GEFA is involved with 4 major water infrastructure loan programs; two state (revolving
funds) and two federal. These loan programs are summarized briefly below (for more
information please see the PowerPoint Presentation for Council Meeting 7 which includes the
GEFA Overview Loan Program Handout that was provided at the meeting):
State Funded
Georgia Fund – provides loans for drinking water, wastewater, water supply and solid waste
infrastructure projects.
Georgia Reservoir and Water Supply Fund – provides loans for water supply projects.
Federal Funded
Clean Water State Revolving Fund (SRF) – for use on water quality (including wastewater
and storm water) and non-point source pollution projects.
Drinking Water SRF – focuses on drinking water with an emphasis on public health and
regulatory compliance; Mr. Kelly noted this fund is not available for water supply to meet
growth.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 7
Mr. Kelly then provided more information about how each fund works and the assets
available for loans. He emphasized that in regard to the Water First program with
Department of Community Affairs (DCA), you can get up to a 1% interest reduction for GA
Fund or GA Reservoir & Water Supply loans under $10 million.
In terms of timing for applying and being approved for a loan; for the federal funding
sources it is typically 5-6 months for SRF and these tend to be bigger projects; for state funds
the turnaround is shorter, typically about 2 months.
Mr. Kelly noted that GEFA is here to help support and work with Council in helping meet
their water needs and as Council gets more detail on projects that are needed to meet future
needs they should keep GEFA in mind. Finally, Mr. Kelly provided a six page handout that
summarizes Georgia’s Water and Wastewater funding sources (see PowerPoint presentation).
CM: Are there any reservoirs expected to be pursued in the North Georgia area.
Mr. Kelly: Yes there are several feasible sites on the “drawing board” including ones that
were identified in the GEFA reservoir study.
CM: Some people think that reservoirs are the “solution” to future growth but in my opinion
these sites are not that prevalent; they need to be technically sound; they take a long time to
permit; there are concerns over cost; and concerns of downstream impacts. Therefore what
percentage of sites do you think will actually go forward?
Mr. Kelly: I think there are several viable projects that can and will likely go forward but can’t
say for sure which ones.
CM: Given the concerns I mentioned do you think that there will be a chilling effect which
would drive people away from reservoir construction?
Mr. Kelly: GEFA does not get into the regulatory process but does try to help communities
implement the projects that they need. Another service that GEFA provides is the “Technical
Assistance Program” which is available to help committees understand resources that are
available to help address local planning challenges and to help them with planning; GEFAs
focus is to help communities get the project done.
Deatre Denion from the Department of Community Affairs (DCA) then provided a short
overview of the Water First Designation for Communities that demonstrated excellence in
water conservation/efficiency noting the following:
The program is a Voluntary program that began in 2002. The first three communities were
designated in 2003. In total approximately 19 communities have been designated for their
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 8
efforts in “going beyond” the minimum water conservation activities in up to 7 program
areas (including water conservation, water supply, water supply protection, wastewater,
stormwater, reuse). The City of Savannah, Cobb and Gwinnett counties were the first three
that received the designation. The next deadline for designation as Water First is October 1,
2010.
6) Current Water Quality Impairments
The PC then provided additional information on Current Water Quality Impairments and the
process used to organize the list of impaired waters. The discussion focused on the color
coded maps that showed both areas of low dissolved oxygen and current and permitted
discharges and well as stream list on the 303 (d) listed streams.
The PC and EPD mentioned that EPD will provide up to $100,000 in non-competitive Section
319(h) funds to a specified funding recipient(s) in each Water Planning Region. EPD is
making these funds available to encourage Council discussions about nonpoint source
pollution impacts on water quality and to facilitate implementation of nonpoint source
pollution management practices. These funds will be provided to a jurisdiction(s) identified
by the associated Council to serve as a recommended eligible funding recipient. It was noted
that there is an annual cycle of funding for the overall 319 Program from the Environmental
Protection Agency and this process for the Councils will fit within that program; there will be
up to $1 million in funding (up to $100,000 per Council) and the funding recipient (and
partners, if applicable) must demonstrate implementation commitment by providing a
minimum of 40% in non-Federal matching funds or in-kind services for use in completion of
the project. EPD has prepared a guidance memo (provided to the Councils) to guide the
Councils (and their planning consultants) in the selection of an implementable nonpoint
source pollution management project to be included in their recommended Regional Water
Plan.
7) Shared Resources Discussion
The PC highlighted several areas of the region and topics that are candidates for discussion
with other Councils. These regions and topics are related to areas were resources are shared
across Council boundaries and where there are gaps between available resource and need.
Chairman Lanier lead the Council through a discussion of the shared resources and sought
volunteers to work with some of the other Councils. The following topics and volunteers
were discussed and identified.
Surface Water Gap – Eden, Kings Ferry, and Claxton; Volunteers - Jim Strickland, Paul, Cleve,
Gary)
Surface Water Gap at Atkinson; Volunteers - Ed, Lindsay, Len
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 9
Water Quality upstream of region (Mount Vernon, Doctortown, Lumber City); Volunteers –
Dent, John Roller, Mark
Surface Water Gap at Statenville; Volunteers, if needed, Rex and Mike Polsky
8) Water Plan Development
The PC presented the overall process and results of the Plan Section drafting and thanked the
drafting subcommittee (Ed, Sue, John and Jim S.). The PC noted that copies of the draft Plan
has been sent to everyone and asked Council to please let us know if they have any questions
or concerns. The PC mentioned that a draft version of Sections 1-8 is due to EPD on October
15 and that we will receive a preliminary review from EPD and will likely have formal
comments from EPD that Council will need to address. The PC mentioned the tricky
dynamics associated with concurrently doing our analysis and drafting the plan and
emphasized that all of our work is dynamic and may change as we get new information.
9) Water Plan Implementation
The PC noted that a key element of our planning process is to identify key implementation
entities and coordinate with these entities. Council will also be asked to identify
implementation milestones and the actions by state agencies to help move the water plan
forward once it is developed.
The PC mentioned some breaking information on the Statewide Joint Meeting that will be
held in Macon on October 6 at Macon State College (8:30-4:00); we will develop our top 4
discussion topics and submit that to EPD and we will be in touch with the Chair and seek
Council volunteers to discuss topics at the meeting example topic that may be discussed
include:
Water Quality Nutrients and Lake
Groundwater wells versus surface water
Current Gap
Future Gaps
Septic versus central waste disposal
Agricultural water use
Water use and land use
CM: Are we late in the process to have joint meetings?
PC: The timelines are tight here at the end but we needed to have our regional data
interpretation before we had Joint Meetings.
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 10
CM: I want the Council to know that we need to have time to do the Plan right. If we have
too many coordination points to do and then concurrently draft the Plan we are not going to
have a quality product.
EPD: We are actively reviewing the Council work as quickly as possible now and we also
need to adhere to the schedule to allow for a solicitation of formal public comment after the
January 2011 submission (and before the June 30, 2011 deadline for Plan completion).
10) Local Elected Official Comments
    There were no local elected official comments.
11) Public Comments
    There were no public comments.
12) Wrap-up and What to Expect Next Meeting
    The Council agreed to hold the next meeting in Swainsboro on October 28th
13) Council Meeting 7 Evaluations
    The PC distributed the evaluation forms and members of Council filled out the forms. The
    PC collected the forms. The meeting was adjourned.
14) Optional Tour of Rogers Farm, Dairy and Swine Facilities
    Several Council members, EPD and the PC join official from the State and Rogers Prison
    for and informative tour of the food production and water use facilities.
cc: Kevin Farrell, EPD
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 11
Altamaha Regional Water Council -Council Members Attendance List
    Altamaha Council Members        8/24/2010
    1     Gary Bell                      X
    2     Randy Branch
    3     Guy Rex Bullock
    4     James Mark Burns               X
    5     Gerald A DeWitt
    6     Will Donaldson Jr.
    7     Cleve Edenfield                X
    8     Jim Free
    9     Randy Giddens
    10    Len Hauss
    11    Edward S Jeffords              X
    12    Phillip Jennings
    13    L. Brinson Lanier              X
    14    Dan McCranie
    15    Steve Meeks                    X
    16    Greg Morris
    17    Buddy Pittman
    18    Michael A. Polsky              X
    19    John E. Roller                 X
    20    Sue B. Sammons                 X
    21    Doug Sharp                     X
    22    Paul A. Stravriotis            X
    23    Jim E. Strickland              X
    24    Dent L. Temples                X
    25    Lindsay Thomas                 X
    26    William G Tomberlin
    27    Michael Williams
    28    Tommie Williams
    29    Russ Yeomans
                              Total     14
 Altamaha Council Meeting 7 Summary
08/24/10
Page 12
Altamaha Regional Water Council
Public Attendance List
           Public Attendee         8/24/2010            Representing
    1       Stan Dansby                X     City of Glennville
    2       Deatre Denion              X     GA DCA
    3       Ted Evans                  X     GA Farm Bureau
    4       Don Giles                  X     GA Farm Bureau
    5       Don Harrison               X     GA DNR - Fisheries Mgmt.
    6       Neil Herring               X     GA Water Coalition
    7       Kevin Kelly                X     GEFA
    8       Alison McGee               X     The Nature Conservancy
    9       Rahn Milligan              X     GSWCC
    10      Ken Rosanski               X     Oglethorpe Power
    11      Bryan Snow                 X     Georgia Forestry Comm.
                             Total    11
 