Memorandum
To:          Coastal Georgia Regional Water Planning Council
From:        Rick Brown and Sue Morea
Date:        October 1, 2009
Subject: Council Meeting 3 Summary
This memorandum summarizes the meeting of the Georgia Coastal Water Planning Council
Meeting (CM) 3 that was held on September 24, 2009 at the Stevens Wetlands Education Center
in Richmond Hill.
1) Welcome and Introductions/Recap Council Meeting 2/Approve Agenda CM 3/ Approve
    CM 2 Summary
    Dr. Ben Thompson, the chair welcomed and thanked everyone for attending. The Chair
    mentioned the flooding in Atlanta and sent along positive thoughts for those impacted by
    the flooding. The Chair mentioned that Mr. David Bennett, the Upper Oconee Chair had
    passed away and expressed his condolence to the family. Council Member Mike Melton
    introduced Mayor R. Davis from Richmond Hill. Mayor Davis welcomed everyone to
    Richmond Hill and stressed the finite amount of fresh water resources available and the
    importance of the work that the Council is doing.
    The Agenda was approved with 21 voting members. The Planning Contractor (PC)
    presented possible dates for Council Meeting 4 and asked the Council members to check
    their availability; a date will be selected at the end of the meeting.
    The PC presented a recap of Council Meeting 2, summarizing what was accomplished in
    CM 2, and provided an overview of where the Council was in the planning process. A
    summary of results of the evaluation forms from Council Meeting 2 was also presented. The
    following comments were made regarding the meeting summary: Council member Phil
    Odom was listed as public attending in last meeting. Have a quorum - 21 presented. The
    Council approved the CM 2 Meeting Summary.
    The meeting continued with an overview of the objectives for Council Meeting 3. These
    included:
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 2
       •   Identifying Region-specific water resources goals to assist in future evaluation of
           water resources management practices;
       •   Review population data and discuss their use in water needs forecasts;
       •   Review draft complete Agricultural water needs forecasts and discuss Industrial
           water demands;
       •   Discuss management practice concepts and planning resources; and
       •   Resource Assessment Information – Increase our understanding of Coastal Georgia
           groundwater and management.
2) Coastal Georgia Regional Water Plan – Goal and Objectives
   The PC made a presentation on the possible Vision and Goals for the Coastal Georgia
   Planning Region. The vision statement from the State Water Plan was shown to the Council
   members to get the members thinking on possible vision statements for Coastal Georgia.
   The PC then showed vision statements that were provided by two Council Members who
   had completed the Vision and Goals exercise that was sent out prior to the meeting. The
   vision statements from the Council members were as follows:
           “The state of Georgia shall seek to manage its water resources by enhancing and maintaining
           a sustainable natural water cycle to protect the ecology and benefit of man’s use of water
           resources in the State’s two watersheds”.
           “The Coastal Region will manage and protect water resources that are vital to the
           sustainability of the economic development’s, growth, recreation and basic quality of life for
           all citizens”.
       A short summary of the discussion, question/comments is provided below:
       •   The order of the list in the vision statement is important. Is our priority economy or
           environment?
       •   We also need to emphasize "education of the public".
       •   Another Council member agrees that order is important and feels the environment is
           very important.
       •   Perhaps economy should be later after the "public health" and natural systems.
       •   Another Council Member provided the view that the economy helps ensure suitable
           public health.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 3
       The PC then listed goals that were received from some of the Council members:
       •   Apply principles of various scientific disciplines for best water management.
       •   Better public education on water use.
       •   Have correct data on resource use to make good decisions.
       •   Seek out compromise between nature’s water needs and man’s water needs.
       •   Listen and learn from others with different points of view.
       •   Do not make assumptions that become facts in one’s mind.
       •   Do our best to balance the needs of the region’s ecology by using conservation and best
           economic principles of water use.
       •   Reuse for wastewater.
       •   Regional Reservoirs.
       •   Incompatible Land uses.
       •   Greater use of Surface water.
       •   Land Use (wetland).
       •   Upgrade of infrastructure/treatment plants.
       •   Salt water intrusion.
       •   Balance economic, environmental and conservation needs of the region.
       •   Balance of uses/balance of impacts.
       •   Consider impacts that will happen in the future.
       The Council had a discussion on the possible goals for the Coastal Region:
       •   We have looked around the state and one of the special aspects of Georgia Coast is
           the unique marshes and estuaries. We need to be careful about how we develop and
           protect these resources.
       •   The ecology of the estuary is a unique attraction.
       •   Water conservation needs to be an important element of the vision.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 4
        •   Preserve the unique coastal environment should also be considered in the vision
            and/or goals.
        It was agreed that the PC would work on the preliminary Vision statement and
        incorporate the Council input with the goal of having a redrafted Vision statement for
        Council consideration after lunch. It was also agreed that the PC would work on future
        fleshing out of potential draft Coastal Council goals would be circulated to the Council
        Members by e-mail prior to CM 4. The Chair and Council members discussed that they
        may need to identify tasks that specific focus or sub-groups could work on to help
        ensure progress as we get into more of the complexities of the water planning process.
        The Chair mentioned that they could have something like a "drafting committee" as an
        example.
3) Role of Water Planning Council – Preparing Georgia’s Water Plan
   Chair Ben Thompson introduced Dr. Carl Couch. The Chair mentioned that Dr. Couch has
   been very supportive of the water planning process and the Regional Councils, and that she
   is well qualified to serve the State and Governor. Ben also mentioned that each Council
   member was uniquely chosen from more than 800 nominations and emphasized the crucial
   role that Dr. Couch and EPD will play in working with Councils in the development of the
   State Water Plan. The PC then played Governor Sonny Perdue’s message to the Council in
   which he thanked the Council members and reinforced the important role they play.
   Dr. Couch emphasized all Council members have been appointed by state leadership. She
   said that economic vitality and environmental vitality are inextricably linked factors and
   went ahead to comment that we have an “A” team in place to get the job done. The process
   is focused to serve the needs of the Council. Dr. Couch mentioned that the planning process
   will have a pace that will at times feel slower and at times very fast. She compared the plan
   development process similar to building a home. So far we have been laying the foundation
   which takes time, as we move forward it may feel like things are moving very quick like
   when the walls are go up; then there will be detail and interior work, it is a complex process.
   Please be patient and continue to contribute.
   Dr. Couch went on to discuss our goal is to estimate the water planning needs considering
   both the environment and demand for water in the future and see where the gap is and
   what could be done to reduce the gap. Think about the world in 50 years. We should we
   have as a vision for our region and state, what does it look like, that will get us thinking on
   what we need to do to achieve those goals.
   She went on to discuss some upstream issues. We have gone from the most historic drought
   to most historic floods. Cobb County had 20 inches of rain in 20 hours; the previous record
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 5
   was 8 inches. Designing the infrastructure of the future means that everything comes with a
   cost and there is a risk involved with every level. We need to find ways to balance the risk.
   She also touched on the Lake Lanier ruling mentioning that Judge Magnuson’s ruling
   against the United States Army Core of Engineers (USACE) focuses on whether the USACE
   had the authority to provide the opportunity for storage in Lake Lanier for subsequent
   water deliveries to the cities and utilities that have made contractual arrangement to use the
   water and have become reliant on it.
   She mentioned that the decision is under appeal and if necessary Lake Lanier may need to
   go through reauthorization and allocation of storage. That effort would involve a
   regulatory process that would evaluate whether Lake Lanier is the most environmentally
   friendly and economically feasible solution to provide water supply to the metro Atlanta
   area or whether other options should be considered. It seems very self evident that it would
   be very costly and environmental difficult to build new storage to replace Lake Lanier
   storage.
   Dr. Couch went on to say that Georgia is the 17th largest economy in the world and our
   natural asset “water” has to be planned and that is the reason and importance of the water
   plan process. Dr. Couch said that she would work to assure the plans can be adopted and
   that this is not a process of surprises and she urged all Council members to stay in
   communication. The Council had the following questions/comments and discussion.
   •   A Council member indicated that the Lake Lanier decision must have broader
       implications; this cannot be unique in GA. What about across the US? Dr. Couch’s
       Response: This needs to be brought up as a national policy issue. There are 48 reservoirs around
       the country in the same situation as Lake Lanier. Need to have a congressional action. There are
       many federal reservoirs that are relied upon and there is a need to look at meeting all of our state
       and regional needs. We are regionally connected economy.
   •   How many applications for regional water supply reservoirs are in the works? Dr.
       Couch’s Response: 8 are in the works. None of the ones in the pipeline now are reservoirs that are
       in response to the Judges the ruling. 12 projects have been permitted in the last 10 years. A
       typical timeline from review to construction has been 8-12 years. The State has a reservoir
       support team and EPD is looking to move that process along more swiftly to reduce the timeline.
       How do we get it done faster? Some projects have suffered from governmental &
       nongovernmental changes. One area we can focus on is better environmental design and site
       selections which should expedite the permitting process.
   The PC displayed the letter of designation from Dr. Couch to the Council.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 6
4) Review of Population and Employment Data and Discussion of Methods for Developing
   Water and Waste Water Forecasts
   The PC reviewed population and employment data and discussed methods for developing
   water and wastewater forecasts. It was agree that the Council will form an Ad Hoc group to
   help the methodology team. The following questions and comments were made:
       •   Will the regional commission be included? PC Response: Yes
       •   Municipal water and wastewater forecasting Ad Hoc meetings will be held in
           Columbus on September 28th and Augusta on Oct. 2nd
           •    The Chair suggested some Council and Non-Council members that should
                consider participation in the meeting including:
           •    Mike Melton, Richmond Hill
           •    Mark Smith
           •    Tony Sammons
           •    Bob Scanlon- Savannah
           •    Bill Edwards- Hinesville
       •   Does EPD have water use numbers in gallons per capita per day (gpcd)? PC- the
           USGS report does have a per capita range -- 75-175 gpcd. 75 gpcd is a preliminary number of
           self supplied domestic which is reflective of well users in more rural areas.
       •   Did you look at any of the systems and line loss? PC- in the gpcd it would be captured.
       •   Do we have a handle on the percentage of water going toward indoor versus
           outdoor water use/irrigation? PC - yes that will be important for determining wastewater
           return flows.
       •   From the planning point of view, what is DCA planning to do in the next 50 years
           and how does that integrate? This needs to be included in the regions plan.
       •   Be aware of the lagging that is inherent in data collection especially as it relates to
           industrial water use projections which may not reflect leading edge technologies and
           water savings.
       •   In regard to 75-175 gpcd, how does tourism play into the equation? PC- tourism and
           water use by individuals that are not captured by the census population count will be
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 7
           accounted for in water use but not base population. Therefore in areas where this is a
           predominate factor we would expect to see higher gpcd. This is a valid methodology as long
           as there is a similar trend in state residential and non-residential water use and growth over
           the projection period.
       •   In commercial fishing industry we do a lot of water for preparation and this is not
           captured PC- you would be captured if you utilized a municipal source. On the other had if
           you are self supplied domestic and use that source for your industry then we may or may not
           be fully accounting for that use in the domestic numbers because there just is not that much
           data collected from private water use systems.
       The PC then presented an overview of the Industrial forecast approach and the
       following points/questions were raised.
       •   Tying employment to forecasts may not be accurate with new technology; may want
           an Ad hoc committee to look at trends on the individual basis.
       •   Do we have all the tools in the box to gain insight on discharge impacts? Do we have
           adequate information to determine how discharges may impact our marshes?
       •   What percent of the population is a regional wastewater system versus individual
           systems. PC- I believe we will have that data
       •   University of Georgia is working to locate each and every septic system
       •   How do we project or reconcile restrictions (i.e. GW restrictions) into the model?
           This Region has had some impacts as a result of the Coastal permitting program. PC-
           The population estimates should not be impacted by current water policy and regulation.
       •   I think population growth may be impacted by water policy and we may see less
           growth due to restrictions.
       •   Dr. Couch - the whole effort you are engaged in will identify where we are going to
           have resource management issues due to resource capacity constraints, we need to
           ask ourselves:
           1) How much water do we have in the system?
           2) How much assimilative capacity is available for example in the lower Savannah
               River?
           3) In some areas like the northern portion of the state there are issues with
               assimilate capacity for phosphorus.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 8
   4) Draft Complete Agriculture Water Needs Forecasts
   Dr. Jim Hook presented agricultural water demands. The Coastal area accounts for 1% of
   the state’s agricultural water use. The following questions/comments were discussed:
       •   How many permits in Bulloch County? Georgia Soil and Water Conservation
           Commission (GSWCC) presented handout.
       •   Are permitted allocations transferable? Dr. Hook- only with the property.
       •   Seems like acreage is low. Dr. Hook- center pivots are smaller than other places in the
           state and there are not that many Counties in this region that have large agricultural
           production.
       •   EPD - provided an update on some Council desires to look at water use below
           100,000 gallons/day and are not regulated. EPD mentioned that the challenge is that
           since they are not regulated they are not reported so there is difficulty getting
           reliable and consistent data. EPD is reaching out to sources such as Georgia Farm
           Bureau and GSWCC to see if there is a good method for getting a handle on these
           water uses.
5) Water Resource Management Practices
   PC provided a follow-up overview of some of the resource management concepts and
   discussed the leadership role the Coastal Council will play in identifying potential
   management practices. The PC discussed the need to consider both water quantity and
   water quality related management practices as these relate to water supply, wastewater
   management, and stormwater management. The PC then provided an overview of potential
   management categories, including conservation, maximizing existing infrastructure,
   developing new ground/or surface water supply. The following comment was made by the
   Council:
       •   Please describe a little more on how we can provide input into the plan development
           process? Would subcommittees handle this? Chair- No, for some items we can do
           subcommittees, but for something as important as management practices we will want full
           council inclusion.
6) Vision Statement (revisited)
   The PC prepared a draft version of the vision statement based on input received from the
   Council members in the morning and the Council agreed by consensus to adopt this vision
   statement with the understanding that it is subject to revision as we continue with the
   planning process. The adopted vision statement is:
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 9
   “The Coastal Georgia Regional Water Planning Council seeks to conserve and manage our
   water resources in order to sustain and enhance our unique coastal environment and
   economy of Coastal Georgia.”
7) Resource Assessments
   Dr. Jim Kennedy presented the Assessment of Groundwater Resources key points touched
   in the presentation include:
        •  Resource assessments
        •  Well yield in Coastal region ranges from 100's-1000's gallon per minute (gpm)
        •  Piedmont and Blue Ridge crystalline rock aquifers north of the Fall Line 10-100’s
           gpm
        •  Paleozoic rock aquifers in northwestern Georgia are also highly productive
   Groundwater use in Georgia during 2005
        •  Coastal Plain aquifers : 86.5%
        •  Crystalline and Paleozoic rock aquifers: 13.5%
   Two levels of modeling
               •   Numerical (i.e. MODFLOW) for prioritized aquifers in the Coastal Plain
               •   Water balance for crystalline and Paleozoic rock aquifers
The following questions/comments were discussed (CM – denotes Council Member):
        1. CM - Is there an upper and lower Floridan? EPD- Yes- but lower Floridan does not
           extend inland to the extent of the Upper.
        2. CM- Are you modeling the lower Floridian? The Lower Floridan aquifer is in the model
           but it will not be modeled for sustainable yield.
        3. CM - Are the Brunswick and Miocene the same? EPD- Yes
        4. CM - Is there an understanding of the recharge of the Miocene? EPD - Where it
           outcrops it recharges there and via leakage from other aquifer units
        5. CM – I believe there was a mine proposed in that area several years back.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 10
       6. CM - Does the aquifer go to the ocean? EPD - Yes, there are freshwater springs under the
           ocean and our model extends to the ocean.
       7. CM - Do the aquifers discharge to the ocean? Yes
       8. CM - Does Georgia's groundwater discharge to Florida? EPD- No, the Valdosta high is
           a mound that becomes a hydraulic boundary in south-central Georgia.
       9. CM - I scuba dive and noted freshwater springs in the ocean at 120 feet but today I
           have not observed these freshwater springs. EPD- Yes, this is due to changes/increases
           in groundwater use which have in some areas reduced the freshwater flow gradient. This in
           turn has lead to saltwater intrusions into/toward the cone of depressions around pumping
           centers. This saltwater intrusion is coming from the ocean and other bodies of salt water. In
           some areas, saltwater is coming from deep geologic units and is historic formation water that
           is not directly from the ocean.
       10. EPD - Salt water intrusion of Hilton Head Island is from the ocean. Salt water intrusion in
           Brunswick is from a salt layer in the lower aquifer. Managing the two types of saltwater
           intrusion requires different strategies because the cases are different.
       11. CM- why does the water move up hill in the Floridian? EPD - pressure.
       12. Is there any correlation between upper Floridian and change in spring flows due to
           agricultural use? EPD- No, not necessarily. It is the same aquifer, but there is special effects
           included in the Gulf Trough by Effingham, creates a hydraulic barrier.
8) Discussion of Management Plan Elements
   EPD provided an overview of the Coastal Sound Science Initiative, including a discussion of
   the USGS modeling of the saltwater intrusion plume near Hilton Head Island and
   highlighted some areas where the modeling needs to be refined/improved. The additional
   modeling was done with a revised model (finite element model). The model improvements
   also involved evaluating multiple layers, including how South Carolina describes the
   aquifer(s). The model was calibrated for steady state and transient conditions. It was noted
   that in Georgia surface water tends to flow along a north-south axis while and aquifers tend
   to run along and east-west axis.
       13. CM -Did EPD model expansion of the Savannah Harbor? EPD- No, United State Army
           Corps of Engineers (USACE) did that modeling.
           CM - will the deepening of the harbor impact aquifer levels what were the
           conclusions of the USACE modeling? - EPD deepening of the harbor would not cause
           additional salt water intrusion. It should be noted that the USACE work showed that in some
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 11
           cases chloride may be migrating into the aquifer confining layers. So in general, the harbor
           deepening does not seem to be a problem. But ongoing well pumping could promote/result in
           driving chlorine into the confining areas of the aquifer.
       14. CM - Did you review the USACE model? EPD- No, the previous state geologist did.
       15. CM – Given the fact that there is a well pumping cone of depression approximately
           180ft below sea level how has the 5 mgd reduction in pumping affected the cone
           EPD - Mr. Larson will be better able to address the pumping rate limits but the trend in the
           cone of depression appears stable.
       16. CM - Once the model is complete, will it be sophisticated enough to predict water
           quality improvement? Are we going to look at management practices on pumping?
           EPD – we are not there yet. We are working toward a completed model. It should be noted
           that the initial analysis indicates that if you stopped all pumping today it will take 100's of
           years for the aquifer to fully clear the salt water.
       17. CM - In Brunswick if pumping is reduced does it allow T shaped plume to move?
           EPD - Yes
       18. CM - Can you use the model to look at yellow zone and other areas? Jim- Yes
       19. CM - Looking at the yellow, red, and green zones, would pumping to west of the
           yellow zone impact the yellow zone? EPD- Not sure- it depends on where and how much
           you pump. Question is asked because those of us that are in the yellow zone need to
           emphasize conservation, and we are concerned that use and different use criteria
           outside the yellow zone could exacerbate and/or cause addition impacts to yellow
           zone. EPD- Good comments and it should be considered.
       20. CM - Does the information we heard about the lower aquifer apply it to surface
           aquifer flow. EPD- No, entirely different mechanisms.
       21. CM - It appears there is a good Georgia, USGS, and South Carolina relationship. Is
           there a similar relationship with Florida? EPD - There is not a strong relationship yet. St.
           John's River Management District is interested in activities in Georgia.
       22. CM - What about aquifer storage recovery (ASR)? EPD – Under House Bill 552 there is
           a restriction on ASR into Floridan aquifer for 11 counties along the Atlantic Ocean.
           Extended sunset date to have June 30, 2014. ASR needs a few design considerations.
       23. CM - Where is the recharge area for the Floridan? Is it at the fall line and what is the
           timeline for recharge? EPD- No, about 40 miles south of the fall line. 1000's of years.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 12
        24. CM - ASR has been discussed. Does injected water move with the aquifer gradient
            move? EPD- Yes stored water will move but it takes time. The goal is to store and retrieve
            before the water moves away.
        25. CM - Consider getting information from Port Authority on anticipated changes
            resulting from the Panama Canal widening.
9) Preparation for Joint Meetings between Councils
    The PC presented an overview of the need to coordinate with adjacent Councils as water
    and aquifer boundaries are shared between planning regions. The joint meetings will help
    establish communication channels and to discuss implications of management practices that
    address shared resources. The preliminary groupings for the joint meetings were presented
    and the PC mentioned that a copy of the grouping would be circulated to the Council
    members via e-mail.
        •   CM - Would like to hear surface water quality presentation.
        •   CM - Can we have a net conference between meetings? PC- that is a possibility.
        •   CM - The Fishery Management Council has a live stream of their meetings. We
            should consider that for this Council.
        •   CM – We need to consider incorporation of other important studies and perhaps
            include in a webinar.
        •   CM - USACE has many studies, so does USGS. We need a bibliography to access;
            there are also many other groups that have studies.
        •   Chair – we will work with planning contractor to start a website with references.
10) Planning Resources
    The PC provided an overview of Planning Guidance and a copy of the Planning Guidance
    document was distributed to all the Council Members. Schedules for the different
    components of the planning process were discussed. The draft plan has to be submitted by
    January 2011 and based on EPD and public comment the recommended plan will be
    finalized on June 30, 2011. The Public Involvement Plan (PIP) was explained and the PC
    explained the need for the Council to adopt a PIP based on the template provided in the
    Planning Guidance document. The Council can fill in and add/modify the template to
    create the PIP. The PC suggested that a subcommittee with a few volunteers be formed to
    complete a draft version prior to CM4 for Council review.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 13
   Council members:
    Keith Post, Randall Morris, and Rick Gardner volunteered to work with the PC on the
   development of the draft PIP.
       •   CM- should consider adding: GA Association of Regional Commissions.
       •   Chair - We have talked about inviting the Regional Commission on the Coastal
           Comprehension Plan. We will follow up to make sure we have good coordination
           and work with staff at DCA and the Regional Commission. Should we formalize a
           relationship with Regional Commission? Recommend Allen Burns or designated
           representative.
       •   Vice Chair - should we also extend the invitation to Chairman Dan Coty?
       The Council agreed that they need to do more work to coordinate with the above
       entities. A Council member felt that it was good to have some of the staff in attendance
       of the meeting and that staff does much of the work in addition to the leadership. Board
       and staff have different perspectives.
       •   CM - make sure Executive Director and Planning Director are on our mailing list.
       •   The Chair revisited the idea of forming and using committees and mentioned a
           couple ideas that he and others had discussed including:
           1. Resource Committee
           2. Land use how to use wetlands for discharging of reuse water
           3. Population
           4. Conservation municipal and education
           5. Technology to look at optimizing resource i.e. Desalination
           6. Groundwater- saltwater intrusion red zone
           7. Stormwater and marsh protection
       •   CM - How will their subcommittee communicate? Email and website may even have
           a password protection part of website.
       •   Chair added- Representatives can go to other Councils. Technical Advisory
           Committee.
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 14
        •   The Chair asked that the Council think about the effective use of committees and to
            offer suggestions on the brainstorming. No formal decision was made as to how
            many committees; this was a preliminary brainstorming activity.
11) Local Elected Official Comments
    There were no local elected official comments.
12) Public Comments
        •   Public- Jackie Teel- Project Manager for the Coastal Stormwater Supplement thanked
            the Council and offered her assistance including a more detailed formal presentation
            on the supplement.
        •   Public - Merrill Varn- St. Mary’s River Management Committee- mention that the
            purpose of the committee is to identify issues and solutions for 4 counties (2FL,
            2GA). Identify issues and recommend solutions. Adopted a River Management Plan
            in 2003. Working with Septic regulations with Univ. of GA- active project.
            Outstanding water designation was a earlier priority but did not get traction, now
            focusing on water quality monitoring procedures- Univ. FL- active project. She
            mentioned that more information is available at www.saintmarysriver.org website.
        •   Tony Abbott- Consolidated Utilities provided his perspective of groundwater
            quality. He mentioned Chatham County chloride levels are 25 mg/L. the
            characteristics of Brunswick are unique in Coastal GA. He asked whether chloride
            increased in drinking water wells in GA since 1950s?; and mentioned the red zone in
            Chatham. Anything east of cone of depression would affect Hilton Head Island.
            Anything west would not affect Hilton Head Island.
        •   Tad Smith- Farm Bureau. Thanked the Council and mentioned his support for water
            conservation, but mentioned that it is important to not limit ourselves to just that
            option all options should be considered when selecting management practices.
13) Wrap-up and What to Expect Next Meeting
    Dates for the next council meeting were discussed and it was decided to hold the next
    meeting on November 17th in Richmond Hill. Requests for any alternative meeting sites
    could be done through e-mail. It was also mentioned that we should consider some field
    trips. One idea that was mentioned was a potential tour of the City of Savannah Water
    Treatment Plant. The PC should ask for other suggestions in the next e-mail to Council.
14) Council Meeting 3 Evaluations
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 15
    The PC distributed the evaluation forms and members of Council filled out the forms. The
    PC collected the forms. The meeting was adjourned.
cc: Jeff Larson, EPD
    Brian Baker, EPD
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 16
Coastal Georgia Regional Water Council
Council Members Attendance List
    Coastal Georgia Council       9/24/2009
            Member
    1     Dennis G. Baxter            X
    2     Fred G. Blitch              X
    3     Chris Blocker               X
    4     Kay W. Cantrell             X
    5     Frank E. Field              X
    6     Rick Gardner                X
    7     John F. Godbee              X
    8     William K. Guthrie
    9     Duane Harris                X
   10     Bill Hatcher
   11     Cecily Hill
   12     Don Hogan
   13     Eric Johnson
   14     Michelle L. Liotta          X
   15     Reginald S. Loper
   16     John D. McIver              X
   17     Michael J. Melton           X
   18     Randall Morris              X
   19     Phil Odom                   X
   20     Keith F. Post               X
   21     Tom Ratcliffe               X
   22     Tony Sammons                X
   23     Mark V. Smith               X
   24     Larry M. Stuber
   25     James Thomas                X
   26     Benjamin Thompson           X
   27     Bryan Thompson              X
   28     Horace Waller
   29     Marky Waters
   30     Roger A. Weaver             X
                           Totals    21
 Coastal Georgia Regional Council Meeting 3 Summary
October 1, 2009
Page 17
Public Attendance List
        Public Attendee          09/24/2009                    Representing
    1      Charles Draeger            X       Garden City
    2      Michael B. Phillips        X       Rincon GA
    3      Gene Millard               X       Interstate Paper
    4      Rachael Hatcher            X       Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission
    5      Jackie Teel                X       Chatham County- Savannah MPC
    6      Sonny Timmerman            X       LCPC
    7      Lupita McClenning          X       Coastal Regional Commission
    8      Tim Barrett                X       GA DNR Fisheries Region VII
    9      Gene Oliver                X       NRCS/Coastal GA RE&D
   10      Joey Brown                 X       LCBOC
   11      Laura Walker               X       City of Savannah
   12      Merrill Varn               X       St. Mary’s River Mgt. Comm.
   13      Will Beson                 X       428 Bull Street Savannah, GA
   14      Brent Dykes                X       GSWCC
   15      Tas Smith                  X       GA Farm Bureau
   16      Rahn Milligan              X       GSWCC
   17      Chris Conner               X       GSWCC
   18      Todd Fairdot               X       Georgia Farm Bureau
   19      Tricia Reynolds            X       Coastal Regional Commission
   20      Jim Hook                   X       Univ. of GA
   21      Alice M. Keyes             X       GA EPD
   22      Deatre Denion              X       DCA
   23      Tony Abbott                X       Consolidated Utilities
   24      Cliff Lewis                X       EPD
   25      John Savayer               X       City of Savannah
   26      Christi Lambert            X       The Nature Conservancy
                     Totals       26
 