Memorandum
To:         Coastal Georgia Regional Water Planning Council
From:       Rick Brown, Katherine Zitsch and Denise Funk, CDM
Date:       07/01/10
Subject: Council Meeting 6 - Summary
This memorandum provides the meeting summary of the Coastal Georgia Regional Water
Planning Council Meeting 6 (CM6), held on June 23, 2010 at the Coastal Electric Cooperative
(EMC) in Midway.
1) Welcome and Introductions/Recap CM 5/Approve Agenda/Approve CM5 Summary
   Chair Ben Thompson called the meeting to order and asked Council Member (CM) John
   McIver to welcome the council to Midway. CM McIver expressed his welcome to the
   council members and the many public attendees at the meeting.
   Chairman Thompson provided an overview of the agenda and kicked off the meeting.
   The CM6 agenda was then accepted by consensus. Next, the CM5 meeting summary was
   accepted by consensus.
   The Planning Contractor (PC) then provided an overview of the CM 5 meeting summary
   and Council feedback regarding the meeting. Overall the Council felt CM 5 was very
   useful. The PC also noted that we are minimizing handouts at each council meeting to
   save paper. The presentation slides are available on the Georgia Water Planning website
   after the meeting. Council members should let the PC know if there are specific items that
   they would like to have printed and sent to them.
   The meeting continued with an overview of the objectives for Council Meeting 6. These
   included:
       •   Review water and wastewater forecast results;
       •   Review current and future conditions resource assessment model results as they
           relate to indentifying water and wastewater needs/gaps;
       •   Gain an understanding of joint resources shared by neighboring regions;
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 2
       •    Discuss management practices subcommittee work on management practices,
            screening and decision making process; and
       •    Discuss initial subcommittee work on water plan development, and plan schedule.
   The location and possible dates for Council Meeting 7 were discussed. The PC suggested
   that Council members think about a location, date and a time in August that would work
   best for a meeting and it was agreed that Council would finalize the date and location at
   the end of the meeting.
   The PC then proceeded to the next major agenda item.
2) Review Water Plan Schedule, Status and Next Year’s Work
   The PC presented two schedules. The first schedule outlined the major tasks and timeline
   for the various activities that need to be completed to develop the regional water plan.
   The second schedule focused specifically on completing the various plan sections that will
   need to be written. The PC mentioned that a report out on the Council subcommittee that
   is assisting with plan development will occur later in the day. In addition to drafting the
   individual sections, the schedule identifies the major review processes including
   producing two intermediate drafts of various sections and a final draft; each of which will
   be submitted to EPD for review and input. Once a final draft is completed in the
   November-December time frame there will be a formal public comment period of about
   45 days. Following public comment, Council will need to consider the comments and
   make relevant changes if needed. Following public comment, EPD is charged with
   making a final determination to approve the plan, approve the plan with conditions, or
   request revisions to the plan that would allow it to be approved.
   The PC emphasized the significant amount of work that needs to be completed over the
   next 6 months and mentioned that to complete the work it is recommended that we
   continue to use subcommittees to keep work progressing between full Council meetings.
   Currently the Council has two active subcommittees: Management Practices Development
   and Water Plan Drafting. The PC mentioned that if during today’s discussions these
   topics pique the interest of any Council member, then please feel free to volunteer for the
   subcommittee(s). The PC also mentioned that we can add additional subcommittees if
   they are needed. One area/topic for which we may need a small committee is to engage
   in inter-council discussions on shared resources.
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 3
3) Review Water and Waste Water Forecast
   The PC presented an overview and consolidated summary of the regional water and
   wastewater forecasts. The following items were presented and discussed:
   The revision made to the baseline industrial forecast was presented. During review and
   analysis of the industrial surface water withdrawal permit database, a misalignment of
   data was discovered for 19 of 331 industrial surface water permits statewide. For these 19
   permits, withdrawal data from one company was inadvertently associated with another
   company. Five of these permits are located within the Coastal Georgia region. Once the
   data was corrected, the total surface water industrial forecast was revised. The correction
   reduced the numeric value of the industrial water demand, but not the forecast
   methodology so the growth projection remains flat in the baseline forecast.
   Next, the development of the alternate industrial forecast was presented. The PC began by
   recapping the council’s concerns over the lack of industrial water growth in the baseline
   industrial forecast expressed during CM5. The PC also explained how the alternate
   industrial forecast was developed since that time. The PC explained how data was
   gathered from CMs, the Coastal Regional Commission and research to identify locations
   for potential future industrial growth. Distribution of additional demand was based upon
   availability of water supply source, current level of infrastructure development, proximity
   to ground transportation corridors and sea ports. The alternate industrial forecast includes
   an additional 35 mgd over the planning horizon with approximately 60% added by the
   year 2030 with the remainder by 2050. The available information regarding future
   industrial growth indicates that it will most likely occur outside the current top 15 water-
   using industries so the growth will be placed in the “Other and Unidentified” industrial
   category. The PC presented maps and tables explaining the distribution of the anticipated
   increase in water demand both geographically and over time.
   Various CMs discussed that both the baseline and alternate forecasts do not consider the
   existing unused permitted capacity of industry within the region. One CM pointed out
   that these industries might not change their water use in the immediate planning horizon,
   but may in the future. Perhaps a set of triggers should be established for when the
   forecast needs to be reevaluated and plan revised. Several CMs expressed concern that the
   plan might impede industry’s ability to fully use their unused permit capacity for
   expansion or for an unanticipated economic development opportunity in the region.
   Several CMs suggested that the plan should document unused permit capacity for
   industry as well as municipal.
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 4
   Then the PC presented the total regional water demands for municipal/publicly-supplied;
   municipal/domestic-self supplied, industrial; and agricultural. Demands were presented
   for both surface and groundwater for each sector. The PC showed how the alternate
   forecasts for both industrial and publicly-supplied municipal increase the forecast water
   demand over the baseline forecasts. Finally, the PC mentioned that the energy forecasts
   are continuing to be developed and will likely be presented on a more statewide versus
   regional level.
   The PC then presented an example table, which summarized the above information for
   each of the demand sectors for each County in the region. There are 9 counties within the
   Council’s boundaries and to save time and reduce redundancy from the previous meeting
   each table was not reexamined. However, the PC mentioned that data from each county
   can be viewed in the CM6 presentation available at the Council’s website
   http://www.coastalgeorgiacouncil.org/.
   Next, the PC presented an animated summary of bar charts for each County by each
   demand sector highlighting the source of supply, total and incremental demand.
   The following additional questions and comments were raised by Council.
   CM: Does the industrial forecast include industry’s efforts toward water conservation?
   PC: The industrial forecast is based upon industry’s 2005 average daily water use and
   does not include any reduction in water use due to water conservation/improved
   efficiencies since that time.
   CM: How often the water plan will be updated?
   PC: The state is generally considering updates every 5 years, but there may be a need for
   specific triggers for updating at other times.
   Chair Thompson: I would like to see triggering language for changes in agricultural
   water demand as well and perhaps this should be included for all forecast sectors.
   CM: I don’t think the forecasting charts reconcile with reality because the Chatham
   County chart shows increases in groundwater demand, but EPD has reduced and capped
   groundwater pumping in that county.
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 5
   PC: This is exactly what we wanted to show the Council and point out as a gap that the
   water plan needs to address. The forecast is based upon continuing past water use
   practices into the future. The Council’s role is to identify gaps and management practices
   to solve these gaps in the future.
   The PC then asked for the Council to consider action to accept the alternate industrial
   forecast and the agricultural forecast.
   CM: Larry Stuber motioned to accept the alternate industrial forecast. The motion was
   seconded by CM Jim Thomas. Motion was passed unanimously.
   CM: Michelle Liotta motioned to accept the agricultural forecast. The motion was
   seconded by Keith Post. Motion was passed unanimously.
   Surface Water Availability Resource Assessment (RA)
   The PC presented a summary of the surface water RA focusing on current conditions.
   First an overview of the river basins and local drainage areas (LDA) was provided. It was
   noted that the LDA is a smaller watershed that contributes surface water that is measured
   by long term river gauges, which for planning purposes have been designated as planning
   and basic nodes. The PC highlighted areas of major withdrawals and major returns and
   described how flow regimes are calculated for regulated (areas that have major upstream
   reservoirs) and unregulated watersheds/LDAs. It was noted that the flow regime is the
   minimum flow that needs to be maintained during dry conditions to protect instream
   needs. It was noted that this is a minimum level of protection and does not necessarily
   provide for all ecosystem needs. The flow regime is defined three ways: 1) flow
   requirements from reservoirs with permit or instream flow release requirements; 2) in
   unregulated systems, the unimpaired monthly flow (modeled flow with human uses
   removed) 7Q10 which is the monthly lowest 7 day flow period that occurred during a 10
   year period; or 3) in unregulated systems the daily unimpaired flow if it is lower than the
   7Q10.
   The PC showed several flow graphics that illustrated the flow shortages to the flow
   regime and in some cases demand shortages, which are shortages to meeting forecasted
   future demands. Flow shortages to the flow regime are denoted as “gaps” in planning
   terms and the PC presented tables showing current gaps at the Claxton, Eden and Kings
   Ferry nodes. Current gaps were not found at the Clyo, Savannah, Doctortown and Gross
   nodes. The surface water availability model results for the future forecast demands should
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 6
   be completed soon and are expected to be presented to the Management Practices
   subcommittee in July.
   EPD: Jeff Larson mentioned that the future conditions model run for the Savannah River
   Basin will include South Carolina’s future forecast demands as determined by various
   forecast assumptions regarding South Carolina water use (i.e., preliminary evaluations for
   Council planning purposes and discussion), followed by a more refined model run(s)
   based on specific water use demand data supplied by South Carolina. The current
   conditions model runs include South Carolina’s current demands.
   CM: Are we talking with Florida as well? Also, consider talking to industry groups that
   are following these inter-state coordination issues closely.
   PC: These issues involve all the resource assessments and coordination is being done on
   several fronts. Dr. Kennedy will be meeting with Florida officials on groundwater uses
   across the state line. Also, a letter from Georgia EPD was sent to Florida in regard to the
   proposed EPA water quality standards. In addition, we need to be aware of the
   plans/activities that may affect the St. Mary’s River (St. John’s Water Management
   District activities in FL).
   CM: During a joint water plan meeting in January, Linda McGregor stated that EPD
   would provide information on surface water availability to all regional councils. This
   information would answer the following question - How much water is available beyond
   what is needed based upon our forecast demands? She stated that they could run the
   models with increasing demand until a gap is created to determine just how much
   additional water is available.
   PC: We are beginning to look at the 70 year period of record in terms of the mean,
   maximum and low flow year rather than just low flow condition. This information can be
   helpful in determining how much water in normally available, not just in drought
   conditions. Also, EPD modeling is currently set up to determine if gaps occur under the
   forecasted demands not determining maximum available. Other information or
   approaches may not be available by August, but perhaps part of the next round of
   planning.
   CM: How much impact will the regional plan have on future permitting – especially in
   regard to water supply source?
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 7
   PC: Council needs to grapple with those issues and decide how flexible their plan should
   be and how much they want to specify.
   EPD Larson: The Coastal Georgia Plan should be considered a dynamic document that
   will be subject to revision, in part, because of all the other activities going on concurrently
   with this Council WDCP process, including the Savannah Harbor Total Maximum Daily
   Load (TMDL) and the Salt-Water Intrusion issues ( Coastal Sound Science Initiative). The
   outcome of these bi-state discussions and ultimate agreements will serve to inform and
   potentially fuel future iterations of the WDCP.
4) Surface Water Quality – Assimilative Capacity Resource Assessment and Current
   Impairments
   The PC then presented information on the water quality RA highlighting the different
   modeling and other water quality assessment tools that have been developed to help
   Councils define their water quality needs/gaps. As part of the resource assessment,
   current permitted wastewater capacity was compared to the 2050 forecasted wastewater
   demand for each county. In the Coastal Georgia region, existing municipal wastewater
   permits in Camden, Long and Liberty cover between 50-75% of the 2050 forecast demand.
   In Chatham and Bryan, existing municipal wastewater permits cover between 75-100% of
   the 2050 forecast demand.
    Then the PC provided an overview describing locations where assimilative capacity
   modeling has been developed. These locations include stream reaches where there are
   current discharges, and the model provides information on the amount of dissolved
   oxygen (DO) that is available in the surface water. The PC also highlighted areas where
   there are lake and estuary models and watershed/nutrient (phosphorous and nitrogen)
   models. It was noted that the dissolved oxygen results contain several somewhat
   conservative assumptions on the volume and concentration of effluent. Consequently
   local knowledge and follow up from Council will be needed. It was also emphasized that
   additional data collection can be an element of the selected management practices where
   information may need to be refined and/or improved.
   Council members offered the following comments:
   CM: The Altamaha River appears to have additional assimilative capacity. The Savannah
   River does not have assimilative capacity because it is a DO limited. What about the Saint
   Mary’s River?
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 8
   PC: There is limited assimilative capacity in the St Mary’s River. Also, the Satilla River is
   shown to be limited and gets worse under permitted capacity model runs.
   CM: Many reaches listed on the TMDL impaired list show assessment pending. What
   percentage of those stream segments with assessment pending actually end up with a
   cause rather than cleared and removed from the list?
   PC: We will look into that and let you know what we find out.
   CM: Do we know the timing of nutrient loading criteria in the harbors (Savannah and
   Brunswick)?
   PC: We will ask EPD, but know that they did say nutrient criteria are coming. Since the
   meeting, EPD provided the following timeline that comes from the nutrient criteria development
   plan agreed upon by EPA and EPD: lakes by 2012, rivers and streams by 2013, and estuaries and
   wetlands by 2014.
   The PC also presented information on future conditions modeling which included
   modeling of future permit capacity and summary maps comparing current and future
   conditions results based on the amount of dissolved oxygen available.
   Finally the PC provide an summary of current surface water impairments based on the
   TMDL Listed segments and noted that most impairments are related to dissolved oxygen
   and fecal coliform. However, there are several impairments for mercury in fish tissue as
   well. The PC mentioned that Council is not required to address TMDL segments but at a
   minimum need to include the status of TMDL implementation in the region. The Council
   may elect to recommend specific segments and actions that could be taken to address
   impairments. The PC then showed paired comparisons between TMDLs and low or no
   assimilative capacity and indicated that this comparison will help use identify real versus
   potential issues and help us learn more regarding if the cause is point or non-point source.
   It was mentioned that the next steps would be to have the management practices
   subcommittee perhaps prioritize the segments and then get into greater detail on the most
   important segments.
5) Ground Water Availability Resource Assessment
   The PC provided a summary of the RA for groundwater describing the region-wide
   sustainable yield values for the prioritized aquifers. The prioritized aquifers include the
   Upper Floridan in the eastern coastal plains and south central Georgia and the Cretaceous
   Aquifer. The PC reaffirmed that under current demands the existing groundwater use is
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 9
   below the aquifer sustainable yield. Under future conditions the demand gets close to the
   sustainable yield. It was emphasized that the modeling assumes a fairly uniform
   distribution of demands and that localized high-density well/groundwater withdrawals
   may need to be looked at in more detail to ensure that localized issues do not occur.
   The PC noted that the eastern coastal plain model covers only part of the Coastal Georgia
   Council region, but did not include many of the counties. These counties are covered by
   other models including the Coastal Sound Science Initiative to deal with salt water
   intrusion issues and the regional groundwater model boundary. Sustainable yields values
   have not yet been determined for all areas, but the region’s 2050 groundwater demand
   forecast by county will be submitted to the RA modelers who will be able to tell us
   whether they can be met.
   CM: What about extending the forecast line out until it meets sustainable yield to find out
   when it will be exceeded.
   PC: Yes, it can be done, but then build-out conditions or changes in agricultural needs
   may not be included.
6) Closing the Gap Guidance
   The PC reviewed a recent letter from EPD Director, Allen Barnes and pointed out that
   Director Barnes appreciates the tremendous challenge that the Councils have in
   addressing regional needs and gaps. In his letter he emphasizes the need to be proactive
   and put in place plans and recommended actions to close gaps but also recognizes that in
   some cases additional data may be needed to more fully characterize needs and close
   gaps. Director Barnes recognized the iterative nature of the planning process and
   recognizes that some activities may need to be further addressed in future updates to the
   regional plans.
7) Shared Resources Discussion
   Next the PC described specific areas where the Council shares surface water and
   groundwater resources. A preliminary list of potential neighboring Councils with whom
   the Coastal Georgia Council may need to have discussions was presented. The Council
   did not make any final decisions and it was generally agreed that the PC can work with a
   smaller group; perhaps the Chair and Vice Chair and maybe a few members to flesh this
   out. The initial potential coordination areas may include:
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 10
   Surface water quality/quantity and groundwater discussions with Altamaha, Suwannee-
   Satilla and Savannah-Upper Ogeechee.
    It was agreed that if we do need to meet, it is important that we define why we need to
   meet and what issue/problem we are trying to address.
   CM: If we have excess capacity, we need to talk to our neighbors (across region and state
   borders) about helping them solve their problems and meet water need.
   PC: We need to consider the forum and timing of broader joint meetings.
   CM: We need to make sure we know what our management practices are going to be
   before we meet with others.
   PC: That’s why we have tentatively scheduled joint meetings for September. We also
   should consider that required flow in streams and rivers may not be enough for aquatic
   species and ecosystems. Perhaps we should have the Wildlife Resource Division and
   Coastal Resource folks from EPD speak at the next Council meeting to cover issues
   including: fisheries and environmental resources in the region.
   CM: Does excess capacity evaluate only industrial and municipal use? It doesn’t take into
   account our fisheries, which are hurting along the coast. Our economic engine which is
   our fishery is not doing well. We’re not taking into account.
   PC: These wildlife and environmental considerations are part of our vision and goals and
   we need to bring that back into our plan work. We will work with the chair and vice-
   chair on scheduling speakers and getting information to the council.
   CM: Within our region, we need inter-governmental agreements/discussions to address
   our issues.
   Next the PC discussed the South Carolina Savannah River Basin Advisory Committee
   meeting on May 6, 2010 that PC and EPD staff attended as well as Chris Blocker from the
   Coastal Georgia Council. This was the second meeting for this South Carolina planning
   effort. South Carolina has done two water plans in the past, the first completed in 1983
   and second done in 1998. They are currently beginning a third update. The first two plans
   were done by South Carolina Department of Health & Environmental Control (DHEC).
   This time they formed advisory groups for each of their four major river basins to help
   them with the process. To facilitate coordination between Georgia and South Carolina’s
   water plans, a council member from both Coastal Georgia (Chris Blocker) and Savannah-
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 11
   Upper Ogeechee are attending SC Savannah River Basin meetings. A member of SC
   Savannah River Basin Advisory Committee is also attending Coastal Georgia and
   Savannah-Upper Ogeechee meetings. There’s also one non-voting member on the SC
   Committee from Georgia. Besides meeting attendance, pertinent information from South
   Carolina’s planning process will be incorporated and considered in the Georgia plans as
   South Carolina move forwards with their current plan development. The next South
   Carolina Savannah River Basin Advisory Committee meeting will be August 2, 2010.
8) Management Practices
   The PC presented an overview of the definition and purpose of management practices
   that can be used to address both Council vision and goals and gaps between current and
   future needs and available resources. The PC handed out an initial list of management
   practices and there was a report out from Council member John Godbee on the activities
   of the Management Practices subcommittee. John highlighted the topics that were
   discussed at the May 19th subcommittee meeting and he made several important points
   including:
       •   It is important that we manage the water resources wisely and use the tools
           available to us. We don’t need to be taking tools out of the toolbox arbitrarily, but
           we can adapt as we get better information.
       •   Our plan should be information driven and contain flexible guidelines that evolve
           over time.
       •   The committee reached consensus on the alternate industrial forecast to distribute
           an additional 35 mgd at the key industrial sites in the region.
       •   Overall, groundwater availability does not look like a major issue, but the red zone
           cap is likely to remain in place and there’s uncertainty regarding how much
           additional groundwater withdrawal may be prudent in the yellow zone. Location
           of the wells is a key issue.
       •   Surface water quantity does not appear to be a major issue; however there are gaps
           at the Claxton, Eden and Kings Ferry nodes. It should be noted that Coastal
           Georgia topography does not lend itself to storage reservoirs. We need more
           information and data to make decisions regarding surface water.
       •   The current list of practices is a good start to help Council select management
           practices.
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 12
       •   It is important for us to use the existing plans and information that have already
           been produced including the Regional Plan of Coastal Georgia, the Water, Sewer
           and Stormwater Inventory done by Thomas & Hutton, and the Coastal Sound
           Science Initiative.
   Following John’s report out the PC described a decision making process that can be used
   to screen and select management practices. A decision tree was presented that included
   screening of management practices based on implementability and effectiveness. The
   recommended process relies on the Council’s operating rules and principle of consensus
   based decision making for those decisions where consensus can be reached. For more
   complex issues and/or if consensus cannot be reached the PC provided an overview of a
   “scoring” process that could be used that utilizes the Region’s vision and goals as
   performance objectives and metrics to determine if the vision and goals are being met. It
   was emphasized that the scoring process does not make the decision, but rather it
   provides more information to the Council to aid them in the decision making process.
   The Council agreed that the process would be a good way to proceed.
   CM: We have received volumes of information since the beginning of this planning
   process. It would be helpful if the core and most important materials were sent out to all
   Council members.
   PC: We are in the process of creating a summary for both Council member use as well as
   a tool for speaking with local governments.
   Chair Thompson requested that the Council members take time during the meeting to
   discuss management practices.
   CM: Are we going to discuss only regional issues or look at sub-regional issues for
   example the red/yellow groundwater management zones?
   The PC then discussed the possible scenarios which may occur within the coastal
   permitting zone. Other processes that impact availability of water sources will not likely
   be finished before the plan needs to be written. One approach would be to develop
   management practice scenarios to address possible outcomes. As an example, the PC
   asked the Council members to brainstorm for management practices ideas if there were no
   additional groundwater permits allowed in the future in both the red and yellow zones.
   The Council members came up with the following ideas for consideration:
       •   Develop additional surface water supply
       •   Supply yellow zone from the green zone by well fields from Long and/or other
           counties
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 13
       •   Utilize Lower Floridan or other aquifers (cost of drilling and treatment of Lower
           Floridan is not as expensive as originally considered, however we need to review
           regulatory aspects that add to the expense of developing Lower Floridan as a
           source)
       •   Switching over industry in Chatham county to surface water from Savannah I&D
           to free up domestic groundwater
       •   Water reuse and other ‘green’ concepts – for example cisterns to capture rainfall
           and use for non-potable uses
       •   Use more surface water for agriculture to free up ‘higher quality’ groundwater for
           domestic supply
       •   Water conservation – demand management
       •   Monetary incentives (from state government) to get smaller communities to
           practice water conservation and decrease leakage/reduce water loss
       •   Tertiary treatment for all wastewater. Then it could be used as reclaimed water
           and/or reduce pollutant loading to our streams. This could be a regional or
           statewide recommendation.
   It was agreed that the council would continue to brainstorm a preliminary list of
   management practices and then begin refining the above list. The following comments
   were also made:
   CM: We need an inventory of existing capacity to see what has already been invested in
   infrastructure.
   PC: The Regional Plan and Thomas & Hutton report can be used to provide much of that
   information. An action item for the PC is to create a summary of this report pertinent to
   closing gaps for use by the management practices subcommittee.
   Vice Chair Ratcliffe: We need a groundwater resource assessment by county
   immediately.
   CM: The range of cost of each management practice is needed for evaluation and decision
   making.
   Public Attendee: Enforcement of existing water conservation measures is not currently
   being done. DCA has a list of case studies showing how communities have implemented
   different conservation measures and the outcomes.
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 14
    CM: The yellow zone limits our community’s growth both economically and in
    population. Any gap may become a limiting factor for economic growth.
    CM: I suggest we get input from citizens and communities within the red/yellow zones
    on management practices that would be important part of the process.
    The PC encouraged that those in red/yellow zones sit on the MP subcommittee. CM John
    McIver and CM James Thomas volunteered to serve on MP subcommittee.
9) Water Plan Development
    The PC provided a summary of the items discussed by the Plan Drafting subcommittee.
    The subcommittee met on May 19 and provided the following input on the initial plan
    sections: 
    •   It was agreed that a shorter plan with technical appendices is the preferred approach.
        This will increase the likelihood that local officials and other stakeholders will read the
        plan.
    •   However, it is also essential that methods and assumptions be well document in the
        plan/appendices.
    •   It is important to include “triggers” that would warrant revising the plan.
    •   Good feedback was provided on what type of clarifying language is needed to
        adequately describe issues unique to the Coastal Georgia region.
    The next step will be for the PC to develop a revised draft. A second draft will be
    developed with the subcommittee over the next month. The PC mentioned that it is
    recommended that as we get more polished sections we have Council approve individual
    sections. This way the Council can build upon each section and then vote on approval of
    the plan as a whole knowing that the individual sections were approved and this will be
    less onerous on the Council members.
10) Local Elected Official Comments
    There were no local elected official comments.
11) Public Comments
    There were no public comments.
12) Wrap-up and What to Expect Next Meeting
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 15
    The Council agreed to hold the next meeting in Midway on August 18th, 2010.
13) Council Meeting 6 Evaluations
    The PC distributed the evaluation forms and members of Council filled out the forms. The
    PC collected the forms. The meeting was adjourned.
cc: Jeff Larson, EPD
    Brian Baker, EPD
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 16
Coastal Georgia Regional Water Council - Council Members Attendance List
 Coastal Georgia Council Members     6/23/2010
     1     Dennis G. Baxter               X
     2     Fred G. Blitch
     3     Chris Blocker
     4     Kay W. Cantrell                X
     5     Frank E. Feild                 X
     6     Rick Gardner                   X
     7     John F. Godbee                 X
     8     William K. Guthrie
     9     Duane Harris                   X
    10     Bill Hatcher                   X
    11     Cecily Hill
    12     Don Hogan
    13     Eric Johnson
    14     Michelle L. Liotta             X
    15     Reginald S Loper               X
    16     John D. McIver                 X
    17     Michael J. Melton              X
    18     Randal Morris                  X
    19     Phil Odom                      X
    20     Keith F. Post                  X
    21     Tom Ratcliffe                  X
    22     Tony Sammons                   X
    23     Mark V. Smith                  X
    24     Larry M. Stuber                X
    25     James Thomas                   X
    26     Benjamin Thompson              X
    27     Bryan Thompson
    28     Horace Waller                  X
    29     Marky Waters
    30     Roger A Weaver                 X
                              Total       22
 Coastal Georgia Council Meeting 6 Summary
07/01/10
Page 17
Coastal Georgia Regional Water Council - Public Attendance List
          Public Attendee            6/23/2010                   Representing
    1    Tim Barrett                      X     GA DNR Fisheries Region VII
    2    Doug Cheek                       X     PARSONS
    3    David Crawley                    X     Effingham County
    4    Deatre Denion                    X     DCA
    5    Sonny Emmert                     X     DNR CRD
    6    Phil Foil                        X     GEFA
    7    Don Gardner                      X     UGA Coop Extension
    8    Dennis Hutton                    X     Chatham County - Savannah MPC
    9    Vincent B James                  X     Fort Stewart
   10    Alison McGee                     X     The Nature Conservancy
   11    Gene Millard                     X     Interstate Paper
   12    Rahn Milligan                    X     GSWCC
   13    Brent Rabon                      X     Fort Stewart
   14    Tricia Reynolds                  X     Coastal Regional Commission
   15    Charles Sexten                   X     BJWSA-SRBAC
   16    Bryan Snow                       X     Georgia Forestry Commission
   17    Tas Smith                        X     GA Farm Bureau
   18    Sonny Timmerman                  X     Liberty County Planning Commissioner
   19    Laura Walker                     X     City of Savannah
                              Total      19
 