                                                                      B&V Project 164139
                                                                            B&V File C-1.2
                                                                              April 22, 2011
To:             Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council
From:           Kristin Rowles, GWPPC
cc:             Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD
Subject:        Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 10 on April 19, 2011
The council meeting was held on April 19, 2011, at the Camilla Depot. The list of
attendees is attached. In addition to this summary, all the presentations (slides) discussed
in this meeting will be posted on the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Council’s web portal
(http://www.lowerflint.org/).
Welcome, Introductions and Chairman’s discussion
Chairman Richard Royal opened the meeting and thanked everyone for attending.
Council member John Bridges led the group in an invocation. Benjamin Hayward, the
Chairman of the Mitchell County Board of Commissioners, thanked group for meeting in
Mitchell County and for its work on the regional water plan.
Richard Royal asked Tim Cash (GAEPD) what would happen if GAEPD saw the need
for changes to the plan after it is submitted to GAEPD. Tim Cash said that the plan will
not be modified prior to the public comment period. He discussed the timeline for public
comment and agency review, and he presented the three options that the GAEPD Director
has in adopting the regional water plans: (1) adopt the plans as submitted, (2) ask the
Council to make revisions to the plan, or (3) revise the plan. Richard Royal asked for
more explanation of what would happen if the GAEPD Director chooses to revise the
plan (instead of asking the Council to revise it). Tim Cash said it was a good question,
but he did not expect the Director to make revisions without notifying the Council.
Richard Royal said that if there are changes made by GAEPD, there should be an
acknowledgment that the plan is not entirely the Council’s plan.
George McIntosh said that the Council should be notified of any revisions and given the
opportunity to meet again. Jimmy Webb said that the Council needs a chance to review
and respond to any revisions. McIntosh made a motion to recommend that EPD notify
the Council of any revisions to the Plan and provide the Council an opportunity to meet
again and address any revisions, if revisions are made. Jimmy Webb seconded the
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 2
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council                        B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 10                                                            April 22, 2011
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011
motion. The Council did not yet have a quorum and delayed further discussion on the
motion until a quorum was present.
Plan Process/Timeline & Overview of Plan Revisions
Kristin reviewed slides (available on website) that presented the Council timeline and
reviewed changes to the plan in the April 12th review draft. She discussed the Executive
Summary (forthcoming) and supplement documents (hand-out with list of supplemental
documents provided). She also reviewed the public comment process and a new Internet-
based comment collection tool that will be used by GAEPD in the public comment
process. A hand-out about the comment collection website was distributed. Council
members can use the on-line comment collection tool to view comments made on the
plan. Council members can also make their own comments on the plan. To use the on-
line comment collection tool, users need to register on the Internet site. In addition to the
Internet site, comments can be submitted by e-mail, fax, or mail.
Water Quantity Committee Report and Recommendations
Committee Chairman Jimmy Webb thanked the committee for its work. Webb reported
to the Council on a meeting with USFWS regarding endangered species issues in the
region. A summary of the meeting is in the pre-meeting packet. Jimmy said USFWS was
willing to work with area farmers to develop strategies to protect habitat as well as
farmer’s water use. Webb said he felt that there was now an “open door” between
GAEPD, the Council, and USFWS. Tim Cash thanked the Council for its work on this
issue. Webb said that Sandy Tucker (USFWS) had been in contact with Director Barnes
(GAEPD) regarding a Habitat Conservation Plan in the Lower Flint. The group agreed
that ultimately EPD would have to play a role as the permitting authority in the state.
Richard Royal told the Council that he has met with Barnes and Tucker and will meet
with them again on Friday, April 22. Barnes has said he will seek funding to determine if
an HCP is necessary.
At this time, with the arrival of one more Council member, a quorum was present. The
Council took up business from the beginning of the meeting. First, the Council
unanimously approved the motion made by George McIntosh requesting that EPD
notify the Council of any revisions and provide the Council an opportunity to meet and
respond to any revisions. Next, the Council approved the meeting summary from the
last council meeting and the agenda for today’s meeting by unanimous consensus.
Webb turned the committee report over to Kristin to review the committee’s
recommendations for plan revisions. Kristin reviewed slides with the committee’s
recommendations. Regarding plan revisions addressing Endangered Species Act (ESA)
concerns, the committee recommended:
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                        Page 3
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council                          B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 10                                                             April 22, 2011
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011
    •   Addition of a Footnote #7 on page 2-5 to reference ESA-related discussion and
        recommendations in other parts of plan
    •   Adoption of Option 2 on page 6-2
    •   Adoption of Option 2 on page 7-16, with modification of the 2nd sentence so that
        it reads: “The Council urges all appropriate state agencies to join in this process,
        including the EPD.”
Regarding the “gap” language, the committee first recommended the addition of a new
final paragraph for Section 5.4on pages 5-8 & 5-9 (neither of the options presented in the
April 12th draft) to read as follows:
        The Lower Flint‐Ochlockonee Council questions whether the criteria used to
        determine “gaps” for surface water flows (as defined in the resource
        assessment models) are appropriate metrics by which to evaluate the
        impacts of consumptive water use on the state’s water resources. The “gaps”
        do not provide for reasonable use by lawfully permitted users. Moreover, the
        “gaps” are not defined in terms of any demonstrable environmental harm.
         The Council disagrees with the approach to identifying “gaps” used in this
        planning process because:
             (a) a gap is not defined by impacts on aquatic health or downstream users;
             (b) it is not clear what the impacts of a gap are;
             (c) gaps occur as a result of use that has already been legally permitted in the
                   region; and
             (d) the modeled gap cannot be closed through demand management even with
                   complete cessation of consumptive water use when a gap occurs.
        Moreover, assumptions used in the resource assessment model regarding
        upstream withdrawals for reservoirs result in a gap that is overestimated
        relative to actual use.
        Closing the identified “gaps” could ultimately cause significant harm to the
        region’s economy and would be counter to the Council’s Visions and Goals
        (i.e., supporting the region’s economy, ensuring access to water resources
        for      existing      and     future    water     users,   maintaining      the
        production‐agriculture‐based economy of the region, and supporting
        sustainable economic growth in the region). Therefore, the Council insists
        that no modifications to existing water withdrawal permitting practices be
        enacted based on the resource assessment model results. The Council
        recommends additional study to determine more appropriate flow targets
        that account for permitted reasonable use and demonstrable environmental
        impacts for use in future planning.
The committee met to finalize this recommendation this morning. The committee
also recommended:
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                    Page 4
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council                       B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 10                                                         April 22, 2011
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011
    •   Clarification of gaps throughout plan as model results (“gap identified by
        the model”)
    •   Addition of the last bullet item on page 7-15: The Council recommends that
        no modifications to existing water withdrawal permitting practices be
        enacted based on the surface water availability and groundwater availability
        resource assessment model results. For a more complete discussion of the
        Council’s concerns with the modeling approaches and results, please see
        page 5-6. [new draft will have updated page number]
Regarding interbasin transfers, the committee recommended the addition of a new final
sentence to the third bullet item on page 7-15 to address a concern raised at the last
Council meeting. The new sentence should read: “However, the Council recommends
against any new interbasin transfers from any basin for which this planning process
identified concerns about maintaining a sustainable in-stream flow regime.”
Next, Kristin reviewed the plan revisions to address the new groundwater results for the
Claiborne aquifer, for which the model was recalibrated using more up-to-date use
information. Kristin said that the explanation of the groundwater results had also been
clarified and improved in Sections 3.2.2 and 5.3. The committee has reviewed these
revisions and recommends them for adoption by the Council.
At the conclusion of Kristin’s review of the committee’s recommended revisions, Webb
made a motion that the Council adopt the changes to the plan recommended by the
Water Quantity Committee. John Heath seconded the motion. The committee’s
recommendations were adopted by the Council by unanimous consensus.
Next, John Bridges made a motion that a new sentence be added at the end of the first
paragraph on page 6-11 (after the words “of less than five feet.”): “Moreover, the
Upper Floridan aquifer in this region is known to recover quickly as a result of
recharge.” The motion was seconded by Huddy Hudgens. This revision was adopted
by the Council by unanimous consensus.
Water Quality Committee Report and Recommendations
Committee chair Jerry Lee could not attend today due to a family medical emergency.
Kristin Rowles gave his report. She said that the committee had met twice since the last
Council meeting. A summary of the March 15th committee meeting is in the pre-meeting
packet. A summary of the April 11th committee meeting was distributed as a hand-out.
The committee reviewed new water quality modeling results on nutrient loading and how
these results are presented in the plan. The committee also discussed outstanding issues
and finalizing the plan. She reviewed slides with the committee’s recommendations for
plan revisions.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                        Page 5
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council                          B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 10                                                             April 22, 2011
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011
First, the committee had asked for a better explanation of the Ochlockonee assimilative
capacity results in the plan. The Ochlockonee goes from 13.77 miles with assimilative
capacity concerns in 2010 to 0 miles with concerns in 2050. Kristin explained that this
result occurred only after modifications were made to existing permit requirements in the
model. The text was modified to explain this better, as follows (Page 5-5, 2nd paragraph):
         In the Ochlockonee, the model projected that the number of stream miles
         where assimilative capacity is exceeded or unavailable will decrease from
         13.77 miles to 0 miles over the same period. It is important to note,
         however, that the Ochlockonee results were attained after modifications
         were made to assumptions about 2050 permit limits and discharge volumes
         for several NPDES dischargers in the Basin, including BASF, Boston,
         Doerun, Moultrie, and Affinity Foods. These modifications were made to
         address assimilative capacity concerns under projected 2050 conditions.
         EPD will modify permit limits for any NPDES permit when assimilative
         capacity is exceeded, and therefore, this type of permit modification would
         be expected.
The committee recommends adoption of this revision, as presented in the April 12th draft.
Next, the committee recommends the addition of the following as a new bullet item in the
list of uncertainties affecting plan implementation on page 6-3:
     •   Legal challenge to the Tired Creek Reservoir in Grady County: The permit
         issued by the USACOE for a new reservoir on a tributary to the
         Ochlockonee River has been challenged by several stakeholder
         organizations and a county downstream in Florida. The litigants are
         concerned over wetland and water quality impacts of the reservoir. The
         litigation has implications for water resource management in the
         Ochlockonee River Basin and in the relationship between Georgia and
         Florida over shared water resources.
The committee recommends adoption of this revision, as presented in April 12th review
draft.
Kristin said that in addition to these proposed revisions, the committee had also
Committee also reviewed the plan’s explanation of new water quality modeling results on
nutrient loading. Additionally, a letter of support from the Council for the Golden
Triangle RC&D 319 grant proposal was sent, as approved at the last Council meeting.
(See page 34 of the pre-meeting packet.)
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                         Page 6
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council                            B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 10                                                              April 22, 2011
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011
Chuck Lingle made a motion to approve the revisions to the plan recommended by the
Water Quality Committee. John Heath seconded the motion. The motion was
approved by unanimous consensus of the Council.
Plan Review Committee Report and Recommendations
Kristin said that Richard Royal asked her to provide the Plan Review Committee’s report
and recommendations. Kristin said that the committee met on March 31st. A meeting
summary is included in the pre-meeting packet. The committee reviewed the March 8th
draft, with an emphasis on Sections 7 & 8. The committee also discussed how to address
comments on Section 3 received from the Division of Wildlife Resources (a division of
Georgia Department of Natural Resources).
First, Kristin said that Table 6-1 had been modified so that high priority practices are
listed at the top of each section in the Table. The priorities noted in the April 12th review
draft reflect the results of the survey on priorities at the last Council meeting.
Next, Kristin reviewed recommended revisions to address the comments received from
the Division of Wildlife Resources (DWR) on Section 3 of the plan. The DWR comments
are included in the pre-meeting packet (see pages 44-47). Page 3-14 of the April 12th
review draft reflects the modifications to address the DWR comments. Additionally, the
list of rare aquatic species from the DWR comments (see page 46 of the pre-meeting
packet) will be added to a supplemental document to the plan.
Next, Kristin reviewed suggested revisions in Section 7.4. On page 7-17, the second
option reflects the committee’s discussion on revenue raising by the Councils. Kristin
said that the language had also been modified to clarify the Council’s position. The
Council discussed the issue of whether, in the future, regional water councils should have
revenue raising authority. It was noted that the Florida water management districts have
taxing authority. It was also noted that this is an issue of more vs. less government. A
Council member said that water decisions should be kept local. No changes were made,
and Option 2 was recommended.
On page 7-18, Kristin said that she was suggesting a revision that the Plan Review
Committee had not been able to address because it did not meet a second time. The
revision clarified the Council’s position on interstate issues. Option 2 was recommended.
On page 7-19, the first bullet item at the top of the page was formerly in the plan as
management practice WQ5. Kristin said that it had been moved to Section 7.4 before it
concerned coordination among regional water councils, and therefore, its scope was
broader than Water Quality. This revision was reviewed with the Water Quality
Committee.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                     Page 7
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council                        B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 10                                                          April 22, 2011
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011
Richard Royal asked if there were any objections to adopting the revisions presented in
the Plan Review Committee report. The Council adopted the recommended revisions
by unanimous consensus.
Local Elected Official and Public Comments
Next, the Council provided time for local elected officials and the general public to
address the council, but no one indicated that they would like to speak.
Final Discussion of Plan/Adoption of Plan for Submittal to EPD
Kristin asked if the Council had anything further to discuss before considering adoption
of the plan. The Council did not have any further items to discuss.
Richard Royal indicated that it was time for the Council to act on adoption of the plan for
submittal to EPD. Steve Bailey made a motion to adopt the plan, as revised in today’s
meeting, for submittal as the recommended regional water plan to EPD. John Bridges
seconded the motion. The motion was approved by unanimous consensus of the
Council.
Richard Royal thanked Black and Veatch and EPD. He acknowledged Kristin Rowles
for her work on the plan. Chuck Lingle thanked Chairman Royal and Vice Chair
Haddock for their service to the Council. George McIntosh thanked the Georgia Water
Planning and Policy Center for its assistance. Tim Cash thanked the Council for its
efforts and said he had learned a lot from the Council. Woody Hicks (Jones Center)
thanked the Council for its efforts to balance the environment and the economy. George
McIntosh noted that over 2500 hours of work had been put into the plan by council
members. Richard Royal commended the Council for its efforts. The meeting was
adjourned.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                            Page 8
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council                B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 10                                                April 22, 2011
Meeting Date: April 19, 2011
Attachment 1:
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council
Council Meeting Attendance – April 19, 2011
Council Members
Steve Bailey                                Rick Moss
John Bridges                                Greg Murray
Jimmy Champion                              Mike Newberry
Hal Haddock                                 Richard Royal
John Heath                                  Steve Singletary
Huddy Hudgens                               Howard Small
Gary Leddon                                 Steve Sykes
Chuck Lingle                                Jimmy Webb
George McIntosh
Council Members Not In Attendance
John Bulloch                                Jerry Lee
Dean Burke                                  Doyle Medders
Jerry Chapman                               T.E. Moye
Terry Clark                                 Jim Quinn
Bob Hanner                                  Will Vereen
Josh Herring                                Bill Yearta
Chris Hobby
Planning Consultants
Steve Simpson, B&V                          Kristin Rowles, GWPPC
Mark Masters, GWPPC                         Doug Wilson, GWPPC
Georgia EPD
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief
Bill Morris
Georgia State Agencies
 MEETING SUMMARY                                             Page 9
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting                                  February 15, 2011
Meeting Date: February 10, 2011
 