                                                                       B&V Project 164139
                                                                            B&V File C-1.4
                                                                        September 20, 2010
To:             Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council
From:           Jim Hawkins, Steve Simpson, & Robert Osborne, Black & Veatch
cc:             Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD
Subject:        Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 7 on September 14, 2010
The council meeting was held on September 14, 2010 at the Franklin, GA. The list of
attendees is attached. In addition to this summary, all the presentations (slides) discussed
in this meeting will be posted on the Middle Chattahoochee web portal
(http://www.middlechattahoochee.org/). The public sign-in sheet is included as an
attachment.
Welcome, Introductions, and Chairman’s Discussion
Council Chair Matt Windom welcomed members and thanked everyone for attending.
Paul Chappell provided the invocation. Matt thanked Jimmy Knight for the facilities.
Matt then provided an opportunity for the public attending the meeting to introduce
themselves. Matt described public comments he has received thus far from stakeholder
groups regarding Georgia’s instream flow policy as well as a letter from the City of West
Point discussing flood protection and the September 2009 flood event in letters of
correspondence between the City and the US Army Corps of Engineers. These comments
are attached to these meeting minutes.
Chair Windom said that he and Vice-Chair Harry Lange attended a joint council meeting
on September 3rd. Matt said it was a productive meeting. He said Councilman Richard
Royal had spoken to Senator Ross Tolleson about extending the process planning another
six months. Council member Joe Maltese concurred. Joe said that the revised Army Corp
of Engineers Water Control Plan will be released next year. Joe said it is hard to plan
without this document and the Council needed an extra year.
Matt Windom said that all the councils will meet in Macon Georgia on October 6th.
There will be four topics with panel discussions. Matt said topics have not been set yet.
He encouraged council members to give him topic suggestions by the end of the week.
Current topics include:
    •   Federal project operations,
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                      Page 2
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                            B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                       September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
    •   Funding
    •   Data needs and,
    •   Interbasin transfers.
Council member Joe Maltese asked the council to consider adding instream flow. Chair
Windom said he thought this was already included as a part of the funding data topic.
Again, Matt reminded council members to submit topic ideas directly to Steve Simpson.
Matt discussed the following calendar of events:
        Completion Date                      Milestone
        September 14, 2010                   Council Meeting 7
        September, 2010                      Plan Review Committee Meeting
        October 6, 2010                      Joint Meeting in Macon
        October, 2010                        Plan Review Committee Meeting
        October 15, 2010                     Draft WDCP Sections 6, 7, 8 Delivered to GA
                                             EPD
        November, 2010                       Council Meeting 8
        November, 2010                       MCH Receives Water Quality Modeling Results
        December, 2010                       Plan Review Committee Meeting
        January, 2011                        Council Meeting 9
        January 31, 2011                     Recommended Plan to GA EPD
        March, 2011                          Plan Review Committee Meeting
        March, 2011                          Council Meeting 10
        March-May, 2011                      Public Notice of Draft Plan
        June, 2011                           Final Production of Adopted WDCP
        June 30, 2011                        GA EPD Approves MCH Regional WDCP
Council member Joe Maltese emphasized that the council would be really “shooting in
the dark” without extending our deadline by a year so the Council could review the
updated Army Corps of Engineers Revised Water Control Plan. Joe Maltese made a
motion to ask the General Assembly to extend the deadline by a year. Jimmy Knight
seconded this. Matt asked the Council if there were any other comments. Council
member Steve Davis agreed that by extending the milestone deadline that this increase
our chances for more viable plan.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                        Page 3
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                              B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                         September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Council member Robert Watkins asked the Council if they thought the Army Corps of
Engineers would consider our plan in the development of their plan. Joe Maltese said
that he thought we would be able to inject comments only during the public comment
portion of the update.
Council member Paul Chappell said he agreed with trying to extend the deadline by
twelve months.
Council member Jim Woods said it was the Council’s responsibility to provide a good
plan. He said if the plan becomes immediately invalid then the Council has wasted its
time. Jimmy Knight also commented that we would be remised (remiss?)if we did not
make comments to the revised Army Corps of Engineers Water Control Plan.
Council member Gordon Moss asked Tim if he knew how much administrative cost
would be involved if we had more time for this process.
When asked, Tim Cash responded to the Council’s discussion regarding the time
extension by asking them to consider the following:
  -   An extension would probably require more money, but we don't know how much,
      and would probably require appropriations by the General Assembly in a less than
      favorable budget climate; and
 -   There are nine other councils that would also probably get the extension which
     means this will be a continued statewide effort and not simply limited to one or two
     councils; and
 -   In response to the Council’s discussion about waiting to finish their plan until after
     the Corps has issued its water control manual so that the Council could comment
     directly to the Corps on the water control manual, Tim reminded the Council that the
     primary responsibility of the Council, as embodied in the State Water Plan and the
     Memorandum of Agreement, is to recommend a Regional Water Development and
     Conservation Plan to the Director of EPD for approval; and
 -   In response to comments that the Regional Water Development and Conservation
     Plan cannot be completed until the Water Control Manual and the lake and watershed
     model results are completed, Tim commented that it is unlikely that we will ever
     have enough information to answer every question in the first round and some of
     those questions will have to be answered in subsequent rounds and that until we have
     had resolution on the issue of whether an extension will be forthcoming, we should
     try to stay on track to write the best plan we can with the best information we have
     within the current schedule; and
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                      Page 4
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                             B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                        September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
 -   The idea of an extension is being discussed at higher levels.
There were no other comments and Matt asked the Council if they had reached consensus
on asking EPD to extend their deadline. There were no objections.
Matt asked the Council to approve the previous Council’s meeting minutes. Jimmy
Knight made a motion to approve and Joe Maltese seconded the motion. They were
approved unanimously.
Draft WDCP Section 1-5
Jim Hawkins reviewed the status of the WDCP Section 1-5 and said the Work Group
provided clear instructions to describe the uncertainties, such as the 1989 Water Control
Plan update, State of Alabama data, and thermoelectric demands. He said they were also
working to define the scenarios that would show what the world would look like in 2050.
Council member Joe Maltese said Scenario 5 with the Water Control Plan update is
problematic for him. Joe said he does not understand why we can’t just talk about the
future with Dr. Georgakakos’s model.
Council member Steve Davis thought the Council needed move beyond Scenario 5 or at a
minimum just point out the problems with Scenario 5. Matt Windom said he wasn’t quite
sure how the Council could not include Scenario 5.
Tim Cash reminded the Council that the Memorandum of Agreement between EPD and
the council stated that council was to plan based on the resource assessments. Tim said
the state plans (the 10 WDCPs) in the state need to be based on the same data for
consistency.
Joe Maltese said he was worried with this concept. Council member Jeff Lukken was
worried that the Council has asked to sign off on a plan that will not be relevant next year
following the issuance of a new Water Control Plan. Council member Bill Gregory
reminded the council that not all councils have to deal with the federal lakes and other
unique circumstances that this council has to deal with.
Council member Ken Penuel asked if the Army Corps of Engineer was basing their
revisions to their Water Control Plan on the same data that this council is using. Council
member Joe Maltese said he is wrestling whether it is our plan or EPD’s Plan. Joe
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                              Page 5
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                                     B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                                September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
questioned whether the council accepts there assumption or does the council “body slam”
EPD.
Tim Cash noted that the Council will receive the comments from EPD this week. Chair
Windom thanked everyone for the good discussion.
Surface Water Availability Recommendations
Jim Hawkins reviewed surface water availability results and also showed two new figures
shown below. This first figure shows the differences in the reservoir storage between the
2010 low flow and 2050 low flow.
                          Reservoir Storage
                              (storage in acre feet)
       4,500,000
      4,000,000
       3,500,000
       3,000,000
       2,500,000
      2,000,000
       1,500,000
       1,000,000
         500,000
              -
                  Lake Lanier  West Point Lake     WF George  Composite storage
                                                              at Woodruff Dam
                 Full Pool    2010 Low Flow          2050 Low Flow
Jim then explained another new figure which shows composite storage contributions of
annual average surface water consumption from all the planning nodes by time.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                                                             Page 6
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                                                                    B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                                                               September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
                                        ACF Basin Consumptive Surface Water Use Projections
                                  450
                                  400
   Annual Average Surface Water
                                  350
                                  300
                                  250
       Consumption, MGD
                                  200
                                  150
                                  100
                                   50
                                    -
                                          2010          2020            2030           2040         2050
                                           WHITSBRG   Columbus + Columbia   MONTEZMA     BAINBRDG   WOODRF_R
Next, Jim reviewed the initial model run of surface water quantity assessment under
drought conditions for the ACF basin. He said there were the following impacts:
    Shortfalls in the Flint are compensated by the Chattahoochee at Woodruff Dam*
    Severe impacts on West Point Lake recreation, fish & wildlife
    Regime flow (environmental flows) not maintained at Columbus or Columbia
    To numerous to count …the Work Group [critical] comments about the ‘89 WCP
Next, Jim reviewed the initial model run of surface water quantity assessment under
drought conditions for the Tallapoosa basin. He said there was there was significant
demand gaps at Newell & Heflin nodes and that storage is needed.
Jim encouraged everyone to read the water quality “strawman” document. Chair
Windom said would encourage everyone to read this. Avoid mandates and more than
encourage. Looking for a happy medium
Jim reviewed existing water quantity practices (already in place) that address water
quantity in the region. These include permit requirements for surface water and
groundwater withdrawals greater than 100,000 gallons per day (monthly average basis)
and, new permits must include conservation planning requirements.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 7
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                            B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                       September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Next, Jim reviewed water demand management practices include measures to conserve
by reducing water use, water waste, and water loss. Several practices have been identified
which could involve additional costs on local governments, industries, and individuals.
These practices include:
         • Support implementation of Tier 1 and 2 conservation activities 23 of 36
         • Require all water providers to implement conservation oriented rate structures
         • Encourage all water providers to implement education and outreach programs
         • Encourage local providers to prepare drought contingency plans
Wastewater return management practices decrease regional consumptive water use by
increasing the quantity of treated wastewater effluent returned to surface waters. These
practices also include water reuse. Returns practices could involve additional costs to
utilities providing central sewerage, industries, and individuals.
These practices include:
         • Encourage communities to decommission septic systems and connect to
         centralized treatment
         • Eliminate further land application system discharges for major (greater than 1
         mgd) facilities
         • Encourage utility providers to determine potential opportunities and
         development of non-potable reuse
Water supply management practices include those which would augment existing water
supply and water quality needs. These practices include:
         • Study the development of new surface water storage reservoirs
         • Implement new surface water storage as necessary
         • Encourage the use of farm ponds
         • Study the development of additional regional groundwater use
         • Encourage interconnection of regional supply systems
An additional category of water quantity management practices aimed at enhancing the
regions ability to meet instream water uses is considered. These practices include:
     •   Advocate for modification to the current operation of the federal reservoirs in the
         ACF basin by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
     •   Establish a new instream flow targets for protection of water quality past the
         Columbus node to maintain a daily average flow at or above 1,350 cubic feet per
         second.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 8
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                              B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                         September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
   •    Prevent reservoir levels from dropping below critical levels to meet authorized
        recreational use in West Point Lake such that normal operation is maintained
        between 632.5 – 635 feet NVGD. Induced flood storage between elevation 635 –
        641 feet NVGD will be utilized when needed.
   •    Modify the RIOP to allow the federal reservoir projects to recover more rapidly
        after drought conditions.
   •    Encourage the use of privately-owned storage in the ACF basin to meet the flow
        requirements below Woodruff Dam during drought periods,
   •    Study the scientific justification for requirement that greater than 5,000 cubic feet
        per second flows be maintained below Woodruff Dam
   •    Study modeling scenarios in the ACF basin under extreme hydrologic conditions
        (i.e. 2009 data for extreme flood and 1920s data for extreme drought)
   •    Advocate for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to reconsider the uses and stated
        purposes for the all the Federal reservoirs to improve the balance and priorities for
        uses and stated purposes (i.e. hydropower, flood control, water supply, recreation,
        fish & wildlife habitat) and/or optimize the uses within the context of the Federal
        Operating Permit
Next, Jim talked about the near-term water management practices which included:
   •    Support implementation of Tier 1 and 2 conservation activities.
   •    Require all water providers to implement conservation oriented rate structures.
   •    Encourage all water providers to implement education and outreach programs.
   •    Encourage local providers to prepare drought contingency plans.
   •    Eliminate further land application system discharges for major (greater than 1
        mgd) facilities.
   •    Study the development of new surface water storage reservoirs.
   •    Encourage the use of farm ponds.
   •    Advocate for modification to the current operation of the federal reservoirs in the
        ACF basin by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 9
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                              B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                         September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
   •    Establish a new instream flow targets for protection of water quality past the
        Columbus node to maintain a daily average flow at or above 1,350 cubic feet per
        second.
   •    Prevent reservoir levels from dropping below critical levels to meet authorized
        recreational use in West Point Lake such that normal operation is maintained
        between 632.5 – 635 feet NVGD. Induced flood storage between elevation 635 –
        641 feet NVGD will be utilized when needed.
   •    Modify the RIOP to allow the federal reservoir projects to recover more rapidly
        after drought conditions.
   •    Study the scientific justification for requirement that greater than 5,000 cubic feet
        per second flows be maintained below Woodruff Dam.
   •    Study modeling scenarios in the ACF basin under extreme hydrologic conditions
        (i.e. 2009 data for extreme flood and 1920s data for extreme drought)
   •    Advocate for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to reconsider the uses and stated
        purposes for the all the Federal reservoirs to improve the balance and priorities for
        uses and stated purposes (i.e. hydropower, flood control, water supply, recreation,
        fish & wildlife habitat) and/or optimize the uses within the context of the Federal
        Operating Permit.
   •    Implementation of these water management practices adopts conservation to
        continue to foster stewardship over the region’s water resources.
   •    Recommendations for changes to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers operation of
        the ACF basin reflect the council’s goal to help resolve the issues pertaining to
        water resources management and competing interests. Desired changes in
        reservoir and instream flow requirements identified have been shown to be a
        viable alternative from a modeling perspective. Adaptive reservoir management
        practices should be further investigated to illustrate the advantages of this
        approach for the ACF basin.
Jim discussed long-term water management practices which address supply augmentation
and reliability and represent greater regional collaboration and permitting efforts. These
which included:
   •    Implement new surface water storage as necessary
   •    Encourage interconnection of regional supply systems
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                     Page 10
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                             B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                        September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
    •    Advocate for changes to biological flows below Woodruff Dam based upon
         scientific justification study.
As a part of the interregional implications of selected management practice, Jim noted the
selected management practices all involve additional resources (time, effort, money). The
costs of these programs should be shared equitably between the state, local jurisdictions,
individuals, and industries. Recommended changes in operation of federal reservoirs
require further interregional coordination and planning between the Middle
Chattahoochee.
Council member Joe Maltese advised the council about FERC relicensing Bartletts Ferry
One Council person requested that public/private development of groundwater be added
to the list. There was also a discussion about the value of expanding sewer service into
the older neighbors on the fringes of development. A market may exist and there may be
a way to encourage communities. Council member Alan Bell said in rural Georgia cost is
prohibitive.
Chair Windom suggested letting the workgroup make one more revision to the strawman
and asked council members to submit comments to Steve Simpson.
Matt then asked if the council could post the draft chapters to the plan to the website.
After some discussion, the consensus was that after an additional review from EPD, the
draft for the first 1-5 chapters could be posted online within the next two months.
Council member Ken Penuel asked Black & Veatch to provide the next iteration of the
plan with strikeouts so members could see the edits.
Desired State Water Quantity Modeling
Dr. Georgakakos , Georgia Tech, presented the modeling runs performed for the Middle
Chattahoochee Water Coalition. A copy of the PowerPoint presentation with detailed
flow data was provided to the Council and is available on the council website.
Three main modeling scenarios were presented, each having modeled runs for current
and future demand conditions:
     • Current IOP operation with current and future 2050 demands
     • MCWC-1: Modifications to the IOP with current 2007 and future 2050 demands
     • MCWC-2: Modifications to the IOP with current 2007 and future 2050 demands
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 11
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                             B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                        September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Dr. Georgakakos said that the current operation of the federal reservoirs on the
Chattahoochee River can be improved because the seasonal inflow targets below which
water can be held back for storage are exceedingly stringent. He also said the operation
of many reservoir systems throughout the country work to refill reservoirs as soon as
possible after drought conditions, whereas the Chattahoochee reservoirs are not allowed
to refill as soon as possible. This has had the effect of prolonging storage deficits on the
order of three or more years to come back to near full pool based upon past hydrological
conditions.
Each of the modeled scenarios had different assumptions. In the modeled scenarios
MCWC-1 and -2, the minimum system inflow was reduced to allow the reservoirs to
refill sooner. This increased the composite storage of the reservoir at lower basin inflows
and allowed a more rapid recovery of the reservoir after drought. This also reduced the
overall drawdown of the reservoirs during historic drought conditions.
Dr. Georgakakos' found by modifying the IOP modification (the first version of which is
described in the presentation), one could meet all existing instream flow and water supply
requirements, and have higher Lake Lanier and West Point levels during droughts. He
said his modified IOP should be further investigated as a possible approach for the ACF
basin and help promote the desired modifications in the Army Corps of Engineers
Operating Manual. For example, he said it may be good to extend the period of record
for his models to include the last drought.
Dr. Georgakakos explained that much complexity exists within biological systems, that it
becomes impossible to quantify the health of that system down to a given flow
requirement. He defended his models use of weekly time scales by saying ecology and
management decision could still be made on a daily basis as long as they maintained the
weekly average. He said the IOP does not define if ecological conditions are sustainable.
Council member Jeff Lukken discussed the flood of 2009 and how it was 500 year flood
event. They had suggested to the Army Corps of Engineers to keep the reservoirs three
to four feet lower before a storm to help alleviate downstream flooding.
Judge Magnuson Ruling
Jim Hawkins provided a synopsis of Judge Magnuson’s ruling. Last year, Judge
Magnuson issued a ruling (Phase 1) that stated water supply was not an originally
authorized purpose of Lake Lanier and water supply from Lanier exceeded Corps’
authority. This ruling would go into effect on July 2012.
On July 21, 2010, Judge Magnuson issued Phase II ruling which focused on the flow over
Jim Woodruff Dam, the Endangered Species Act (ESA), and NEPA (National
Environmental Policy Act) .
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                        Page 12
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                               B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                          September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Florida had argued for more water for sturgeon and two species of mussels by using the
ESA. Judge Magnuson ruled the ESA claims are without merit and must be dismissed.
The judge also recognized that the Army Corps of Engineers violated its obligations
under NEPA by implementing the initial 2006 IOP prior to seeking FWS advice. Also,
others argued that the Corps should have prepared an EIS for the 2006 IOP or the 2008
IOP. The judge said these NEPA claims are prudentially moot. In other words, it makes
little practical sense for the Corps to develop an EIS for a plan that is destined to be
replaced within two years.
Next Jim highlighted the following quotes from Judge Manuson’s Phase 2 ruling. He
encouraged the council to the read the actual ruling and said it was actually not too bad
read.
         “The Corps’s rather cavalier attitude toward its duties under NEPA is
         distressing, to say the least. The Court is troubled by the Corps’s refusal to take
         responsibility for its utter failure to conduct any sort of environmental analysis
         whatsoever on the plan by which it has operated the ACF basin for more than 20
         years.”
         “Had the Corps been less recalcitrant over the past 20 years, it is possible that
         such a step (preparing a water control plan) might have forestalled this phase of
         the litigation altogether. But given the contentious history in the ACF Basin, it is
         not surprising that no party is willing to trust the Corps to do its job in
         accordance with the law.”
         “Nor will this Court, or future courts considering the Corps’s actions, look
         favorably on the Corps’s stubborn insistence on excluding from its analysis all
         reasonable alternatives in the ACF basin. For instance, an EIS that does not at
         least consider the effects of current and future water supply is….for all intents
         and purposes, a useless document.”
         “The Georgia parties are correct that all decision makers would benefit from the
         comprehensive analysis of a range of potential activities in the ACF basin, and it
         is likely that the Corps’s failure to conduct such an analysis would be an abuse of
         the Corps’s discretion under the [Administrative Procedure Act] APA.”
There were no questions.
Endangered Species Act
Sandy Tucker, supervisor of the Georgia Ecological Services Office for the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS), gave a presentation to the Council about the Endangered
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                         Page 13
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                              B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                          September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Species Act (ESA). Tucker said that the law was enacted in 1973, and it is implemented
jointly between USFWS and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA). Tucker explained how the various sections of the Act apply in the context of
water planning.
Tucker stated that mussels need fish and water to reproduce. She noted that ESA
prohibits “taking” of endangered or threatened animals by killing, shooting, harming,
injuring, or harassing. Federal agencies have to ensure that their actions do not jeopardize
the continued existence of listed species or adversely modify critical habitat. Jeopardize
is an important term under the Act; it means causing the listed species to go extinct
sooner. To protect listed species, federal agencies consult with USFWS. Any exceptions
to takings prohibition must be covered by a permit with USFWS. Permits require
protective actions to counterbalance potentially adverse actions.
Tucker provided examples of federal activities that could affect listed species, such as
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE) operation of reservoirs on the Chattahoochee
River, federal funding for road building, and USDA FSA financial incentives and
programs. For each of these activities, the federal agency must consider the impact of its
actions and the ESA listed species.
Tucker said that low water years are bad for ESA listed mussels in the region. She said
that the Council’s plan will address listed species. She said that the plan could include
drought contingencies that protect flows and allow for shared pain across users in drought
years. She said that withdrawals permitted by GAEPD have made conditions worse in
drought years.
Tucker said that the ESA is a federal statute, but it is addressed at all of us. It gives us a
responsibility to conserve species in trouble. The role of the USFWS is to try to strike a
balance between people and listed species.
Council member Jeff Lukken asked if we knew the exact flows to meet particular species.
Sandy said this would be nice, but we don’t. She said we do know there is a range of
flows needed over time to sustain the species.
Council member Steve Davis asked if you could protect and keep species elsewhere, aka
sturgeon. Sandy said this would be difficult the species has to be self-sustaining.
Council member Joe Maltese said there was a disconnect with the Georgia USFWS and
Florida USFWS. In Florida, there seems to be a rapid implementation very intense
science on places such as the Apalachicola river and it is not as intensive here in Georgia.
Sandy said she did not see the discrepancy. She said the USFWS works on the best
available data.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                      Page 14
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                             B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                        September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Council member Jeff Lukken asked if there was a specific tipping point and if there was,
couldn’t you add a conservative buffer to come up with the required minimum flow.
Sandy said they didn’t exactly know.
Council member Paul Chappell asked about the movement of mussels. Sandy said that
you can see trails left in the sand near creeks as water levels decrease. Some mussels
travel across the stream bottom, while others burrow straight down into the sediment.
Joe Maltese commented that he had seen a study where instead of more water needed
downstream of Jim Woodruff dam, more sediment is actually really needed in the water.
Chairman Windom thanked Sandy Tucker for her presentation.
Conservation
Jim Hawkins discussed what he considered the big three; Conservation Development
Plan Tiers of Conservation, Water Conservation Implementation Plan (WCIP), and the
Water Stewardship Act of 2010.
First, Jim discussed the four plan tiers of conservation which included the following:
        Tier ONE practices – mandatory through rules or law
        Tier TWO practices – options addressed through rule
        Tier THREE practices – optional, basic
        Tier FOUR practices – optional, beyond basic to help “close the gap”
Next, Jim discussed the Georgia's Water Conservation Implementation Plan (WCIP)
which was updated and released in March 2010. The WCIP incorporates improvements
suggested by Georgia citizens, businesses and organizations, including:
    1. A summary chart of critical elements of the plan: the sector-specific conservation
         goals, benchmarks, best practices and implementation actions;
    2. Updated language regarding Georgia's drought conditions; and
    3. Enhanced benchmarks, definitions and references.
Jim said the WCIP was intended to create a culture of conservation and guide Georgians
toward more efficient use of our state’s finite water resources. He said it will help to
guide decisions on water use and management:
    1. Educating water users about water conservation practices and the goals they can
         accomplish,
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                    Page 15
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                          B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                     September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
    2. Informing regional water plan preparation that will be overseen by regional water
        planning councils,
    3. Helping water use sectors collectively improve water use efficiency, and
    4. Informing DNR rule-making regarding water conservation requirements in
        permitting.
Next, Jim explained the Water Stewardship Act of 2010. He said it directs agencies to
examine their practices and identify enhanced programming and incentives for voluntary
water conservation and enhanced water supply by local water providers. It also gives
EPD authority to establish minimum standards and best practices for public water
systems to address leakage, water loss audits, and leak detection.
Jim said the act also gives EPD authority to revoke, suspend, or modify a local
government authority’s water withdrawal or waste treatment permit for violations of
outdoor water restriction guidelines. Some other points Jim made includes:
       Farm use surface water/groundwater withdrawal permits
       Multi-tenant sub-metering beginning July 1, 2010
       High efficiency fixtures required in new construction beginning July 1, 2012
       High efficiency cooling devices in new industrial buildings beginning July 1,
        2012
     Creates Joint Committee on Water Supply
There were no questions.
Water Quality Management Practices Recommendations
Steve said water quality management practices were based on reviewing material from
EPD such as TMDLs, water quality modeling schedule & approach and regional water
quality related efforts. We have gathered additional data fromForestry Commission BMP
Survey information, and BMPs for nurseries.
Steve they consolidated the strawman into bullet points and sorted the practices between
near-term and long-term. Steve said near-term projects were projects that could be
implemented within five years. They include the following:
    •   Near-term
            – Support existing plans & practices and improved enforcement
            – Improved land use planning, particularly stream buffers
            – Improve BMP implementation and documentation
            – Create and fund a stream buffer land acquisition program
            – Require Georgia Stormwater Management Manual adoption
            – Eliminate additional LAS for large discharges
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                    Page 16
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                           B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                       September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
            – Increased water quality monitoring & coordination
    •   Long-term
            – Reduce permitted utilization of assimilative capacity
            – Advocate for equitable nutrient criteria throughout the region
            – Additional state regulation requiring stormwater utilities
Other recommendations include:
    • Increased State Funding for GA EPD Advocated
    • Creation of a Program for Stream Buffer Land Acquisition
    • Increased grant funding for water quality improvement projects
    • Additional funding needs to be defined for long-term water quality management
        practices
Steve Simpson said through the Section 319(h) Grant program, there is a funding set
aside of approximately $1 million for council recommended projects. This funding will
be divided among the ten regional councils. There is a 40% match requirement for
funding from the entity administering the project. Funding can be used for projects such
as stormwater controls and stream restoration. The committee will be reviewing this
opportunity.
Steve also said the committee is planning to reconsider recommendation following
review of water quality modeling results anticipated in November 2010
Joe Maltese noted that the committee needs to add the Metropolitan North Georgia Water
District plans as a source. Steve said yes they should and reminded everyone that if there
are more sources of data to let him know.
Council member Ken Penuel noted that the Army Corp of Engineers Corp shoreline
management plan could have tremendous impacts. After the meeting, Ken said that the
schedule for the shoreline management plan has been changed and the “draft” plan will
not be out until January of 2011.
Council member Robert Watkins said he was concerned about addition regulations, such
as for subdivision, he said they were already very detailed already for erosion and control
plans. Joe Maltese said he thought the intent was not for additional regulations, but an
attempt to level the “playing field” from county to county.
Chair Windom said he still does not understand the costs involved with these practices.
Jim Hawkins suggested the council may need to look at the Chesapeake Bay as an
example. Steve Simpson said the costs can be investigated more. Ken Penuel suggested
ranking the costs and Joe Maltese suggested development of a cost matrix.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                         Page 17
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                              B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                         September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Jim Hawkins asked Jack Dozier to give his opinion. Jack said he would be very careful
discouraging LAS. He thought there were not water quality impacts with these. He said
that may put the economy at a competitive disadvantage.
Steve Simpson said they were still looking for additional input for Section 6 of the plan.
Groundwater Sustainable Yields Update
Steve Simpson reviewed the groundwater sustainable yield updates from GAEPD. A
hand-out of the results was distributed, and the slides are available on the Council
website. Steve reviewed the prioritized aquifers map, the sustainable yield modeling
metrics, and the model results for the prioritized aquifers.
The sustainable yield results were compared to groundwater use estimates. Steve said that
the updated results do not change the sustainable yield estimates, but the use information
that is compared to the sustainable yields has been updated. The prior use estimates have
been updated with the Hook estimates of agricultural water use, and these estimates
substantially increased the use estimates in this region.
The Council discussed the Dougherty Plain results in detail. The updated results show
that the growing season average use of groundwater is above the sustainable yield for this
aquifer in a median year and a dry year. Modeling results indicate that groundwater
drawdown in this aquifer, as caused by groundwater use, is very limited. The modeling
results therefore reflect similar findings to the surface water availability results already
considered by the Council: groundwater withdrawals impact surface water flows in the
region. Steve Simpson noted that GAEPD is not planning to re-calibrate the model for
this aquifer because it is a USGS model.
WDCP Sections 6-8 Development
Jim Hawkins described how the October draft would be developed. Jim said the
strawman documents will be combined and form the basis for Section 6.
Jim reviewed the Table of Contents for Sections 6, 7, and 8 of the regional plan. The
Table of Contents is included in the pre-meeting packet. In addition to the strawman
recommendations, these sections will include discussions of: fiscal implications,
implementation responsibilities and schedules, recommendations to the state, alignment
with other plans, and plan implementation benchmarks.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                      Page 18
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                            B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                        September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Wrap-Up
Chair Windom asked the Council to set a date for the next meeting. The Council selected
November 10th. The location in the Columbus-LeGrange area would be finalized from
Council suggestions to Matt Windom after the meeting.
Matt indicated that he has appreciated the efforts of the council in furthering the planning
effort.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                          Page 19
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council                  B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                             September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Attachment 1:
 Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council
Council Meeting Attendance – September 14, 2010
Council Members
Alan Bell                                   Joe Maltese
Paul Chappell                               Aaron McWhorter
Steven Davis                                Gordon Moss
Larry Dillard                               Ken Penuel
Gardiner Garrard                            Denney Rogers
Bill Gregory                                Jimmy Thompson
Joe Griffith                                Robert Watkins
Jimmy Knight                                Don Watson
Harry Lange                                 Matt Windom
Jeff Lukken                                 Robie York
Council Members Not In Attendance           Walter Rosso
Jimmy Bradley                               Randy Simpkins
Larry Clark                                 Jim Woods
Phillip Eidson                              Brad Yates
Thomas Ellis
Garrard Gardiner
Gerald Greene
Bill Heath
Planning Consultants
Jim Hawkins, B&V                            Steve Simpson, B&V
Robert Osborne, B&V                         Mark Masters, GWPPC
Georgia EPD
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief
Bill Morris
Georgia State Agencies
Patti Lanford, DNR-WRD
Luke Crosson, GASWCC
Joe Krewr, GADCA
 MEETING SUMMARY                                         Page 20
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                            September 20, 2010
Meeting Date: September 14, 2010
Attachments:
Public Comment
 -----Original Message-----
From: Matt Windom [mailto:mwindom@ccwageorgia.com]
Sent: Thursday, August 12, 2010 5:24 PM
To: 'April Ingle'
Cc: 'langeci@mchsi.com'
Subject: RE: Region Council Assessments
Ms. Ingle,
I appreciate you sharing your concern related to the current instream flow planning standard. I agree
there are many demands on the water resources within our region and state and a balancing of these
demands is appropriate. I have forwarded your email to our region's planning contractor to insure that
they are aware of your concern.
Sincerely,
Matt Windom
-----Original Message-----
From: April Ingle [mailto:ingle@garivers.org]
Sent: Wednesday, August 11, 2010 5:11 PM
To: mwindom@ccwageorgia.com
Cc: langeci@mchsi.com
Subject: Region Council Assessments
Dear Chairman Windom:
Georgia River Network represents citizens across Georgia who are interested in the protection and
conservation of our water resources and therefore in the regional water planning process you are
leading. We recognize that water is a critical issue not only for the future growth of Georgia’s economy,
but also for the preservation of our state’s heritage of boating, fishing, swimming and hunting and our
unique and valuable natural resources. For that reason, we are deeply concerned that the current
instream flow planning standard being used in the regional councils’ water planning process is not
sufficiently protective of these things we all value.
We realize that the planning process is well underway and that time is critical. Therefore, we are
recommending that your council immediately consult with the Science and Engineering Advisory Panel.
 EPD formed the Science and Engineering Advisory Panel (SEAP) for advice and input in addressing
technical concerns during the water planning process. It is composed of some of the nation’s leading
authorities on riparian ecology and hydrology. We are confident that they have the knowledge to help
your council develop water plans that ensure there will be enough flow in the streams to protect fish,
wildlife, and other values important to us all.
If the information provided by the SEAP scientists leads your council to conclude that there is a need
for a more protective standard, we ask you to request EPD and its contractors to modify the surface
water assessments accordingly.
In order to avoid this issue with future water plan updates, we also ask that your council recommend
funding be made available immediately for research that would allow formation of a more sound
instream flow policy.
 We understand that as Chairman your Regional Water Council you have a difficult job of balancing all
sorts of different demands for water. We thank you for your efforts and pledge to cooperate any way
we can to finalize an appropriate water plan for your region and the state as a whole. If I can be of
service to your council in any way, please call me at the number below. I look forward to hearing how
your council plans to address this important issue.
Sincerely,
April Ingle
April Ingle
Georgia River Network
Executive Director
126 South Milledge Ave., Suite E3
Athens, GA 30605
706-549-4508
http://www.garivers.org
Click Here to Join GRN Today!
        