                         Georgia Department of Natural Resources
                                     Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch
                                        4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354
                                                  Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232
                                                                                       FAX: 404/675-6247
                                             December 01, 2009
MEMORANDUM
TO:              Council Members
FROM:            Kevin Farrell, GA EPD
                 David Ashley, JJG
SUBJECT:         Council Meeting 4 Summary
                 Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan
Regional Water Planning
Council Meeting 4 Summary
Meeting Date:             November 16, 2009
Location:                 Flint Energies, Warner Robins, Georgia
Attendees:                See list
1) Welcome and Council Member Introduction
Elmo Richardson, Council Chairman, welcomed everyone and introduced host Bob Ray, CEO of Flint
Energies. Mr. Ray mentioned in his welcome speech that 16 percent of their energy comes from
hydropower. Chairman Richardson then introduced Senator Ross Tolleson, Chairman of the Natural
Resources and Environment Committee. Senator Tolleson welcomed everyone and gave an update on the
Governor’s Water Task Force (Task Force). He mentioned that each of the Council Chair was asked to
be on the council and that this task force is not intended to take away work of the Regional Planning
Councils, but will be more of an enhancement. Chairman Richardson mentioned that he had already been
involved in one meeting and two conference calls, and that several additional meetings are on his calendar
to develop alternatives on the Lake Lanier water issue. He asked that if the council had any questions or
issues, such as interbasin transfers to please contact him and he would take it to the Task Force.
                                                                                          Meeting Summary
                                                         Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                        December 01, 2009
Senator Tolleson spoke again to ensure that the Council understood the full meaning of interbasin
transfers, it does not always mean moving water long distances (e.g., moving water from south Georgia
to north Georgia). Some counties have multiple river basins in them, so there already are numerous
interbasin transfers occurring.
Chairman Richardson reiterated that the concerns were for “major” interbasin transfers.
Kevin Farrell updated the Council on the new leadership at EPD. F. Allen Barnes was appointed Director
of the EPD in October 2009. Mr. Farrell read a memo that Director Barnes sent to the Regional Council
members to thank them for their commitment to the task of regional water planning and advising that
early next month he will convene the chairs and vice chairs for the Council Leadership Forum conference
call. Mr. Farrell shared his optimism on the direction of EPD with Mr. Barnes’s leadership.
2) Agenda and Council Meeting #3 Recap
David Ashley presented a recap of Council Meeting #3 on September 10 and briefly discussed the agenda
for Council Meeting #4. Mr. Ashley then discussed the Governor’s Task Force briefly, stating that the
group would be looking at many options as directed by Governor Perdue. The Governor formed the Task
Force as part of overall response to Judge Magnuson's July ruling regarding Lake Lanier. The results of
the Task Force’s work are expected by the end of the year. The Governor’s strategies include:
         •    Appeal
         •    Negotiations (as directed by Judge Magnuson in ruling)
         •    Congressional Reauthorization
         •    Contingency planning (focus of the Task Force)
The Task Force is comprised of over 80 business, environment, and government leaders; Coca-Cola
Enterprises Chairman and CEO John Brock and Tim Lowe of Lowe Engineers are serving as co-chairs.
The Task Force has met for first time on October 7th; will hold two more meetings and present
recommendations before January 2010 legislative session.
3) Demand Forecast Update
Municipal Water Demand Forecast Update
Ms. Tai-Yi Su presented the council with the current status of the Municipal Water and Wastewater
Demand forecast. She informed that today’s presentation would be a progress update. The revised
population projections have not been released by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Budget.
EPD held two ad-hoc meetings on September 28 and October 2, 2009 to gather input from council’s
expert representatives. Two members (Mark Wyzalek from Macon Water Authority and Marianne
Golmitz from the City of Warner Robins) attended the September 28 meeting for the Middle Ocmulgee
Council and a few additional members have also agreed to review the methodology. Following these
meetings, the Planning Contractor had sent input request form and a questionnaire to major water
                                                                                                         2
 
                                                                                             Meeting Summary
                                                         Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                           December 01, 2009
providers in the region at the direction of our Chairman to gather additional data input. So far we have
received comments from Butts County, Newton County and Peach County.
Ms. Su presented a table of preliminary per capita water use rate for each county calculated based on the
2005 raw water withdrawal and estimated population served by public systems reported by U. S.
Geological Survey (USGS). Some of the per capita water use rates were revised according to the input
received after the ad-hoc meetings. She highlighted the exemplary cooperation the Council has received
from Newton County. Newton County has a complicated situation with water supply and services –
water withdrawal right belong to one entity and treated water is distributed and resold through multiple
entities (including Newton County Water and Sewer Authority and the City of Covington). The entities
in Newton County had taken an initiative to organize several meetings regarding this issue and have
provided the Planning Contractor with additional data to correct what was reported in the USGS guide.
Working directly with water providers has been beneficial to the Planning Contractor in the development
of more accurate data. Ms. Su encouraged the council members to follow up with their local water
providers if they have not reviewed the preliminary water use information. She stated that feedback is
needed from those the Planning Contractor hasn’t heard from. The Planning Contractor plans to follow
up with utilities that have not yet responded.
She then briefly discussed the methodology for projecting municipal wastewater generation. Total
wastewater generation will be determined by multiplying the projected municipal water demand by the
percentage of water used indoors, plus estimated quantity for inflow and infiltration. Outdoor water use is
assumed to be 100 percent consumptive (loss). Indoor water use is assumed to correspond to wastewater
generation. The Planning Contractor will estimate average indoor water use based on an established
methodology explained in EPD’s report “Georgia Water Use and Conservation Profiles’ (March 2008).
The calculated wastewater quantity will be treated in either an onsite septic system or a centralized
wastewater treatment system. For future projections, this population served ratio may be held constant
(base scenario), or may be modified by the Council based on anticipated management practices. Treated
wastewater is either discharged as a point source to existing surface waters or to a land application system
(LAS). The ratio of flow from centralized treatment to each of these disposal options will be calculated
based upon proportions of point source discharges and LAS currently permitted by EPD. For future
projections, the ratio will be held constant, or may be adjusted based on additional input from Council
members as part of the selection of management practices.
The Planning Contractor needs input from the council and local communities on where they think the
trend will be for their communities in 2050 for 1) onsite treatment (septic) vs. centralized treatment, and
2) point discharge vs. LAS.
The next steps of municipal forecasts include:
    • EPD will re-convene ‘expanded’ regional ad hoc groups to further refine county and municipal
         gpcd’s and transient population considerations (early Dec 2009)
    • The Planning Contractor will develop preliminary municipal water forecasts (Jan/Feb 2010)
    • Presentation of preliminary forecasts and Refinement of forecasts (Feb 2010)
                                                                                                           3
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                         December 01, 2009
Question: What is the average (wastewater) return rate?
Answer: It varies from county to county. For large systems the return ratio may be about 80 percent, for
some counties this ratio may be in the 30 to 40 percent range if they are mostly on septic tanks. Each
county’s rate has not been calculated yet, but this information will be shared with everyone as it becomes
available. The Planning Contractor has reported wastewater quantities from EPD and will be comparing
it to the estimated wastewater quantity based on indoor water usage.
Question: There are public water systems supplying water that have no sewer systems, are we taking that
into account?
Answer: Yes, we have reported wastewater discharge data and will be comparing this data to the
estimated wastewater quantities based on indoor water use. In some counties, the sewer system may only
serve a small population and a large percent of wastewater goes to septic systems. The future trends may
be very different in 2050 and we would like your feedback on these assumptions.
Question: Are there any other reporting agencies outside of Bibb County that give a breakout of
outdoor/indoor water use percentage?
Answer: Six utilities were selected to participate in EPD study. There is also a statewide percentage.
Question: How did you use data to break out an outdoor/indoor water percentage?
Answer: Consumption rates were evaluated during winter and summer. The winter consumption is
assumed to be the “indoor” usage. The difference between the summer months and the winter months is
assumed to be outdoor usage.
Question: Traditionally, as areas go from rural to urban they also typically go from agriculture to
municipal/residential/commercial. What allowances are there from one particular water use to another
and from county to county?
Answer: We will look at four different categories of water use (municipal, industrial, agricultural and
energy). We’ll review existing comprehensive or master plans for future trends. Local feedback is
needed from council members on future outlooks of their communities.
Comment: Still concerned - You can’t use per capita numbers if we expect to transition. Rural counties
are now what Newton County may have been 20 years ago. Need to take into account the changes in use.
Answer: The best data is local knowledge and the master plans for each community. We will take this
issue back to discuss with EPD and other Planning Contractors.
Question: How far did the trend go back?
Answer: The water use data is from 2005 to 2008. However, Dr. Warren Brown considered historical
trends for population projections.
Question: Just to clarify, when you say master plan, do you mean comprehensive plan?
Answer: Yes, we are collecting various existing plans including comprehensive plans, water/wastewater
master plans, etc. to understand more fully what has been planned in the region. Please let us know if you
have any existing plans that we should consider for this planning process.
                                                                                                          4
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                         December 01, 2009
Preliminary Industrial Water Forecast
Mrs. Su gave a brief review of the forecast methodology. The industrial forecast focuses on the twelve
major water-using industry categories (mining, food, textiles, apparel, paper, chemicals, petroleum,
rubber, stone and clay, primary metals, fabricated metal products, and electric machinery). The
automobile industry was added later on based on council input. Current (2005) industrial water
withdrawal represents approximately 11 percent of the total water withdrawal in Georgia, and the twelve
major water-using industry sectors represent over 90 percent of industrial water withdrawal in Georgia.
EPD convened an Industry Ad-Hoc Group meeting on August 18, 2009. Since they met, representatives
of the industries have provided information relative to future water use in the state for the major water-
using industries. The preliminary forecast is based on the revised employment projections (provided by
UGA) for these industries and will be compared with information provided by the industries. The
differences between the forecasts are currently being discussed with industry representatives. Ms. Su
stressed that the preliminary forecast will be shared with the council members, but will not be published
at this point based on an agreement with the industries. The Industrial Ad-Hoc Group feels that additional
time is needed to work out the differences in forecasts. Basic assumptions for industrial water demand
forecast include:
     •   Water use increases at the same rate as employment (growth estimates completed by Dr. Dorfman
         of UGA).
     •   If the industry sector is projected to be in decline, the existing water use/capacity will be held
         constant for the planning period so that the community may use this existing capacity to recruit or
         attract future industries.
Ms. Su showed the graphical illustrations of employment projections for the Middle Ocmulgee Region for
the planning period (through 2050). The graphs prompted several question from council members.
Question: Do we know why they think fabricated metals will drop? What about Robins Air Force Base?
Question 2: I have a similar question - it doesn’t really show Robins AFB.
Answer: Robins Air Force will be accounted for in municipal water use even though its current permits
are industrial permits. It was decided that institutional use will be accounted for in the municipal
category. The trends for the fabricated metals category are different council by council as are the other
industrial forecasts. We’ll have to check with Dr. Dorfman on the reason for the decline projected for the
fabricated metal industry.
Ms. Su pointed out that while future employment in mining is projected to go down, water use for Kaolin
production is captured in the Stone and Clay category and is shown a gradual increase through 2050.
Kaolin is a major industrial water use in the Middle Ocmulgee region. Groundwater is its primary source
of water supply.
Comment: Projections on textile industry is in decline but the rubber industry is shown to have a
significant increase in future employment, but rubber industry relies on textile.
                                                                                                           5
 
                                                                                            Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                          December 01, 2009
Answer: Even though textile is shown in decline, if municipality currently has capacity for, we are
holding it constant. We will take the question of the rubber industry to Dr. Dorfman of UGA for
consideration. Ms. Also stressed that some of industries may be supplied by public water systems and its
water use may not be reflected in the forecast which is mostly based on existing self-supplied industries’
reported withdrawals. This is why we need water providers’ help so we can extract the industrial demand
from residential and commercial demand.
Question: Agriculture is another category, how do we adapt if that transitions?
Answer: Something we need to look into. We will take this question to EPD and other Planning
Contractors for discussion so there will be a consistent way to handle this issue.
Ms. Su pointed out that most of the projected water use shown today was based on reported water usage
from self-supplied industries. If the industries are currently supplied by public water systems, their water
use may not have been reflected in the projections unless this data have been provided to the Planning
Contractor. For example, the food manufacturing (poultry processing) industries in North Georgia are
supplied mostly by public water systems. The intention is to extract this publicly-supplied industrial
water use from the municipal demand, if data is available. However, this demand may currently be
captured in the municipal demand, but we want to avoid double-counting.
The next steps in completing industrial water/wastewater forecasts include:
     • Sharing results with the Industry Ad Hoc Group and public (via website)
     • Soliciting any additional input and making modifications where warranted
     • Reconfirming results with Industry Ad Hoc group
     • Completing forecasts for regional councils
(4) Special Presentation by Georgia Power – Energy and Water Use
Ms. Tanya Blalock, environmental manager for Water and Land Program at Georgia Power gave a
presentation titled “Energy and Water Use”. She gave a quick overview on where water is used in
various stages of energy production. She then discussed the various terms of water use (withdrawn,
reused, consumed, returned, and conserved). In energy production, more water is used for cooling
purpose and the evaporation results in consumptive loss. Ms. Blalock showed pie charts of withdrawal
and consumption data for various uses. Question was raised based on these charts.
Question: Why is water use for livestock only accounts for 1 percent of the total withdrawal but 5 percent
of total consumption?
Answer: These two pie charts show the percentages, but do not show the actual quantities that are
different. The total consumption is less than total withdrawal quantity.
Ms. Blalock reminded the Council that we need to look at the big picture. Is it a water withdrawal or
consumptive loss? In a once-through cooling example, out of 2.4 billion of gallons (bgd) of water
withdrawn, 2.2 bgd is returned and only 245 million gallons per day (mgd) is consumed.
                                                                                                           6
 
                                                                                             Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                           December 01, 2009
Ms. Blalock pointed out that energy production is a challenge and a constant balancing act. The newer
plants require less overall water withdrawal, but tend to use more cooling towers and therefore consumed
more water (through evaporation loss). Some of the water also is used in scrubbers for air pollution
control. New scrubbers are going on line at Plant Scherer and will increase water consumption.
Scrubbers and more cooling towers increase water consumption (approximately 1.5 mgd is used per
scrubber).
Ms. Blalock shared with the group that people ask if we can save water by saving electricity. To answer
the question, she showed a graphic showing the base load of 24/7 stations that generate power
consistently; then the intermediate load that occurs during the day; and then peak load generation when
there is a heightened use of power – heat of the summer using air conditioners, etc. For the production of
base load power needs, large coal/nuclear plants with cooling towers are used and they generally consume
more water. For production of intermediate load during the day, combined cycle or once through cooling
facilities are typically used. For meeting peak demand, combustion turbines are typically used and they
consume little water.
Georgia Power has always prepared projection for future energy needs. Ms. Blalock stated that Georgia
Power has to plan into the future because the lead time on building power plants could be between 3 years
and a decade. Forecasting water needs from energy production is a more difficult task and has not been
done. To associate water needed for a future plant is a challenge if it is going to be a base load plant or a
peak type plant. The location of the plant may also be a challenge. Georgia Power is working with other
energy companies in the State to assist EPD in this task.
Question: What is next best efficient plant? What about bio-fuel or hydro facilities?
Answer: Hydro facilities are the most efficient from a water use perspective. As water runs through a
turbine, there is evaporation from the lake but no consumption through the power generating process.
Question: Where does electricity go to serve from the power plants?
Answer: It generally goes into a grid and goes out. Based on what the load is, a computer system
dispatches turbines in the most cost efficient way (so base load first, then combined, then combustion).
We cannot say all plant generation goes to “x”.
Question: Regarding Lake Jackson – do you know what base you need to run all the time?
Answer: During a drought, less power is generated from a hydropower facility, during times of peak flow
there is more generated (the plant was used approximately half of the normal amount last year due to
drought, and approximately 200 percent this year because water is available), most hydropower plants are
“run of river” facilities, meaning what goes in, comes out.
Question: How much does Georgia Power consume in this region?
Answer: Plant Scherer is permitted to withdraw 63 mgd from the Ocmulgee River to Lake Juliette; but
annual average consumption is about 35 mgd.
Comment: There doesn’t seem to be a need for conservation other than the cost of water.
                                                                                                            7
 
                                                                                             Meeting Summary
                                                           Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                           December 01, 2009
Non-Permitted Agricultural Water Demand - David Ashley
Mr. Ashley updated the council on the work being done on the non-permitted agricultural water demand
forecasts per discussions from Council Meeting #3 in September. He explained that the issue arose that
smaller agricultural uses are not captured in the current Agricultural Water Demand Forecast and
members of the sub-threshold water-use sectors were concerned and wanted input into the forecasts.
Some livestock, dairy, poultry and nursery agricultural water uses are not captured in the current
forecasts. These sub-threshhold water use sectors (< 100,000 gallons per day) feel that exclusion of their
water use diminishes their economic importance to Georgia. Georgia Farm Bureau (GFB) has facilitated
representation of sub-threshold agricultural water users and two meetings/conference calls have been held
(September 30 and October 16) to discuss the issues relevant to these water users. Some council has
formed sub-committees to investigate the non-permitted water use. EPD is working with these sectors to
establish a state-sponsored effort that will be consistent throughout all regions. The collected data will be
presented at Council Meeting #5 and the councils will decide whether to include the sub-threshold ag use
in their plan.
Council member Tony Bass was asked to update the council on this issue. He said several of the groups
had concerns about the non-representation (dairy, poultry not represented). Two Ad Hoc meetings were
held to discuss issues to amend and update the agricultural forecast. Data is still being compiled. The
lesson learned is that each person within their industry needs to be aware of the projections, take action to
review the data and make the data better. Data compilation is still a work in progress.
Question: Will we get a chance to accept or reject data once presented?
Answer: Yes.
5) Resource Assessments
Surface Water Availability
Dr. Wei Zeng of EPD presented an overview of surface water availability assessment. He discussed the
process of compiling existing municipal, industrial, thermal, and estimated agricultural water use from
1300 data-gathering facilities. The observed flow data were compiled for 76 nodes in the model from
hydrologic data from 1939 to 2007.
Unimpaired Flow
Dr. Zeng defined the Unimpaired Flow as the natural flow in the streams or river prior to any reservoir
regulation, evaporation, and any water withdrawals or return by users. The Unimpaired Flow is estimated
by adding the consumptive water use back to gauged flow, and correcting the flow data by removing the
effects of reservoir regulation, evaporation and precipitation. This data set tells us what Mother Nature
would have given us, had there been no human impact to the system.
The benefits of using the Unimpaired Flow include: (1) the data provide a firm background for all
technical analyses; all water uses, including off-stream or in-stream uses, will be evaluated against this
                                                                                                            8
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                         December 01, 2009
background; (2) Past and potential future reservoir operations can be evaluated against the same set of
hydrologic input, making any comparison of reservoir operations meaningful.
Assessment Unit: Sub-Basins, Basic and Planning Nodes
The river basins are delineated into smaller hydrologic units (sub-basins) for better understanding of the
rivers’ behavior. In the model, Basic Nodes are usually located at existing USGS gages with long-term
flow data. Planning Nodes are a sub-set of Basic Nodes where sub-basins are determined; the sub-basins
are the basic spatial scale for Resource Assessment.
Desired Flow Regime
Dr. Zeng defined the Flow Regime as the pattern of flow variability for an individual surface water
source. Flow regime involves the magnitude, timing, duration, frequency and rate of water movement.
The Desired Flow Regime reflects the extent of in-stream flow protection that has to be in place as
mandated by state and federal laws or regulations (what we need to preserve in the river system). EPD is
being advised by the Scientific and Engineering Advisory Panel on scientifically defensible approaches in
determining protective regimes. The Desired Flow Regime can reflect the Councils’ additional
consideration in the types of stream flow that meets their in-stream flow needs.
River Basin Planning Tool
The surface water availability assessment uses the River Basin Planning Tool developed by Dr. Aris
Georgakakos’ team at Georgia Institute of Technology’s Water Resources Institute. The tool provides
mathematical representation of aspects of managing water resources at river basin and sub-basin level.
When populated with the Unimpaired Flow data, water use data, and water resource management options,
the tool accounts for water movement in the river basin.
Current and Future Condition Assessments
Given the unimpaired flow data, the water use data, and the desired flow regime, we can evaluate whether
there is enough resource availability to address all of the needs. The accounting of the amount of water
over time tells us whether we can meet all of the needs, and when we would have a shortage. Also, we
can tally the days when we see a shortage and learn how much of the time we would see a shortage. The
“current condition” analysis focuses on determining whether there is a shortage meeting existing needs,
and does not include adoption of any Management Practices. EPD and its Resource Assessment
contractor are finalizing the modeling work, and plan to present the results at the joint meetings in mid-
January.
Following assessment of current conditions, the future water use conditions will be evaluated. Alternative
solutions will be developed if there are gaps between the available water and future needs. Best
Management Practices will be selected to address the gaps between future water use scenarios and
available water. The Councils and their Planning Contractors will inform the Resource Assessment team
of their choices of Management Practices, and the Resource Assessment team will run the River Basin
Planning Tool to see if the gaps can be addressed. This may involve several rounds of iterations between
the Councils (or their technical representative) and the Resource Assessment team, until all gaps are
addressed by appropriate Management Practices.
                                                                                                          9
 
                                                                                            Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                          December 01, 2009
Question: What’s the difference between a basic node and a planning node?
Answer: All basic nodes were selected at where long-term monitoring data is available. Planning nodes
are special basic nodes. The Resource Assessment is done at the planning node (sub-basin) level.
Question: Have there been any true flow deficiencies other than the Chattahoochee River basin?
Answer: The Chattahoochee River shortage is more of a result of a “policy shortage”. For example, the
Magnuson ruling in July 2009 puts hundreds of million gallons per day of municipal water supply in
jeopardy.
Question: Are there any other rivers that have a public perceived shortage?
Answer: In 2007 during the height of the drought, the Oconee River experienced a true shortage – they
had to get permission to withdraw water below the required minimum flow level. This is one example of
a physical shortage or “real” shortage. In 2007, when the Army Corps of Engineers decided to limit
hydropower generation from Lake Allatoona to conserve storage in the lake, Alabama Power Company
pressured the Corps to do the opposite, increasing hydropower generation and resulting in more release
from Allatoona, to rescue the Alabama Power lakes downstream on the Coosa River. There was not a
physical shortage since these lakes have much larger drainage areas than the Corps projects in Georgia.
This was not a physical shortage because earlier in the season, Alabama Power Company made releases
that were much higher than the requirements, even when their projects were lower than normal. In other
words, the status of these lakes was at least partially the result of Alabama Power Company’s earlier
policy.
Question: Low flow standards and environmental impacts. Before man-made lakes were formed and
these low flow regulations were required, droughts would draw river flow lower than what we are
required to maintain now.  Nature would adapt.
Answer: As an example, the regulated low flows below Lake Seminole were poorly conceptualized and
constructed without good data. Sometimes the problems were overfishing, not lack of water. For
example, the Gulf sturgeon population was depleted due to overfishing. When commercial fishing
stopped, the population of Gulf sturgeon steadily recovered. In setting the initial Interim Operation Plan
(IOP) flow thresholds that were extremely high, humans tried to protect the sturgeon by requiring
minimum flow that is less than science-based. This resulted in the low system storage that lasted through
the peak of the 2006-2007 drought.
On Flow Regime, before more scientific studies become available and adopted by the state, we will use
the State Interim Instream Flow Protection Policy in its place. The current interim policy calls for
passage of the monthly 7Q10 (7-day average flow that occurs once in 10 years) flow below water intake,
among three options; if the flow is lower than the 7Q10 or what is required of the other options, the
permitted facility (excluding the grandfathered ones) is required to let inflow pass.
Groundwater Availability
Dr. Jim Kennedy of EPD gave a presentation on the status of groundwater resource assessment. He first
gave an overview of Georgia’s aquifers. There are multiple aquifers in Georgia and the most significant
                                                                                                         10
 
                                                                                              Meeting Summary
                                                           Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                            December 01, 2009
defining feature in the State is the Fall Line that runs from Columbus to Macon to Augusta. Well yields
from the major Coastal Plain aquifers south of the Fall Line may be on the order of 1,000 gallons per
minute (gpm) while well yields from the crystalline rock aquifers north of the Fall line are often less than
100 gpm. Well yields in the Paleozoic rock aquifer of northwestern Georgia may also be on the order of
1,000 gpm. Approximately 86.5 percent of groundwater was withdrawn from the Coastal Plain aquifers.
Dr. Kennedy described the needs to prioritize aquifers for sustainable yield analysis because a
comprehensive accounting of all aquifers in Georgia would be extraordinarily expensive and time
consuming. He discussed the criteria used to prioritize the analyses. It was determined that the more
sophisticated numerical computer model (MODFLOW) would be used for Coastal plain aquifers south of
the Fall Line where groundwater withdrawals were highest during 2005. These include the Upper
Floridan aquifer (in the Dougherty Plain, in Tift County area and in eastern Coastal Plain), the Cretaceous
aquifer between Macon and Augusta, and the Claiborne aquifer in southwestern Georgia. Models of
prioritized Coastal Plain aquifers were built by refining a regional Coastal Plain aquifer model previously
developed by the USGS.
The “Water Balance” models are used to analyze the aquifers in North Georgia where less groundwater is
withdrawn. Water Balance models consider water input and withdrawal information and are an
appropriate tool to determine sustainable yield of Paleozoic rock aquifers in northwestern Georgia and
crystalline rock aquifers in the Blue Ridge of northeastern Georgia. Groundwater from crystalline rock
discharges to surface waters via bedrock fractures that encounter the surface water. Stream base flows
decrease as groundwater levels in the crystalline rock aquifer drop, as would happen during a drought
when recharge is decreased or with pumping from the crystalline rock aquifer.    Therefore, sustainable
yield of the crystalline rock aquifer will be quantified as a percentage of stream base flow.
Dr. Kennedy then discussed the benchmarks for sustainable yield established for Georgia. They include:
    •    Drawdown of ground water levels between pumping wells in the pumped aquifer do not exceed
         30 feet as to not affect nearby wells.
    •    Do not decrease stream flow below 60 percent of the mean annual discharge during April to
         September and 40 percent during October to March
    •    Over time the reduction in aquifer storage becomes asymptotic to a new base level
    •    Do not lower groundwater levels below the top of a confined aquifer.
    •    Do not exceed the ability of the aquifer to recover to baseline groundwater levels between periods
         or higher pumping during drought.
Preliminary results show that in some aquifers the sustainable yield is higher than the withdrawal. Dr.
Kennedy said he has received results from EPD’s Groundwater Resource Assessment contractor and is
currently analyzing the results. He expects to present all results in the joint meetings in January 2010.
Question: How does the Cretaceous aquifer look?
Answer: We are still analyzing the results. It’s highly variable.
                                                                                                           11
 
                                                                                          Meeting Summary
                                                         Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                        December 01, 2009
Question: The Cretaceous goes under Floridan, how is it affected by Floridan’s drawdown?
Answer: There may be drawdown below the recharge zone of the Floridan aquifer.
Question: Do you use nodes?
Answer: Nodes are used for surface water assessment; maps will be given for the groundwater
assessment.
Question: Do floods affect yields of wells?
Answer: No, they may affect availability for recharge, but not the available yield.
6) Public Involvement Plan
The revised draft public involvement plan (PIP) was sent for the council’s review prior to the meeting
based on the comments received from Council Meeting #3. Charlotte Weber went over the changes
requested for the Middle Ocmulgee’s draft PIP.
Guiding Principles
Only one additional principle was added: the council takes a proactive approach to public involvement
and outreach.
Key Stakeholders
Ms. Weber reviewed the added stakeholders list recommended from the last meeting. No other
stakeholders were discussed.
    • Developers
    • Water utilities because they may not be part of the local governments.
    • Design professionals – landscape architect, and engineers, etc.
    • Soil and water conservation districts [Note from Planning Contractor: These are considered
         partnering agencies.]
    • Land owners adjacent to or encompassing major tributaries, streams, lakes or other water sources
    • Non-governmental Agencies [Note from Planning Contractor: List of non-government agencies
         will be corrected in the draft PIP.]
    • Listed partnering agencies
Procedural Criteria
One council member had concerns that the public is scheduled to speak at the end of the meeting and may
not be the best for good ideas that the public may have.
Question: Shouldn’t the public be allowed input earlier?
Answer: Chairman Richardson responded by noting that during today’s session (and past sessions), the
public had asked questions and provided input and it seemed to have worked okay so far. [Note from
Planning Contractor: The public can provide input at times approved by the Chairman during meetings.
The public was allowed to provide comments prior to lunch and immediately following the first
discussion of PIP at Council Meeting 3.] 
                                                                                                        12
 
                                                                                          Meeting Summary
                                                         Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                        December 01, 2009
Meeting Announcements
Council had recommended sending press releases out to media after the meeting. Ms. Weber suggested
forming a Public Involvement Committee to implement this. Completing press releases was not part of
the Planning Contractor’s scope of work. The Chairman asked for volunteers and did not get any
response. However, it was agreed that the meeting summaries would be condensed into an executive
summary and the Planning Contractor would send that executive summary to the current list of media
contacts after approval by the Chair and/or Vice Chair. The council members were asked to send Ms.
Weber any additional contacts for local media that they wished to be included in this.
Additional Outreach Opportunities
In response to the council and the public’s comments from Council Meeting #3, a series of additional
outreach techniques were discussed including a blog, comment form, press kits, and a social networking
site. Ms. Weber discussed the possibility of a Public Involvement Sub-Committee to help implement
these ideas. Mr. Ted Hendrickx from the EPD gave an update on the public commenting tool EPD is
developing. He said that a website commenting tool is being developed and is scheduled to come online
in January 2010. The comment form will be available on the website but will initially be developed for
input for the resource assessments. This tool will be used again for comments for the draft plans. This
will give the public (and council members) an opportunity to comment directly to the EPD on concerns
and issues. It is not clear at this point whether this tool will be available in between the commenting
period for Resource Assessments and for the draft plans.
One council member expressed that many council members are business people and do not have time to
work on additional public involvement tasks. The Council had no volunteers for a sub-committee and it
was determined that the majority of the additional outreach opportunities from Council Meeting #3 be
removed from the PIP except the website comment form and the press release/executive summary.
Non-Government/Partnering Agency Involvement
The final recommended change to the PIP was the clarification of non-government and partnering agency
involvement which was a category added to the PIP. The discussion highlights included:
     • The key is in disseminating information and gathering input
     • Proper communication channels should be established between the Council and the NGOs and
        Partnering Agencies
     • Members of NGOs and Partnering agencies provided an opportunity to comment at the end of
        meetings
     • Members of local governments may provide written comments
     • Members may provide a link to the Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Website on their
        websites.
7) Management Practices
David Ashley presented an overview of management practices. He stated that following gap analysis and
the initial joint meetings to discuss the results of resource assessments, the initial selection of
management practices is expected to begin at Council Meeting 5. The management practices would
address needs from the three overlapping areas: water supply, wastewater and storm water. He discussed
                                                                                                        13
 
                                                                                            Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                          December 01, 2009
examples of management practices in these areas and the definition of “gap” from quantity and quality
perspectives. The Council’s vision will establish specific goals for the region’s water in 2050 and guide
the selection of management practices. The regional plan will include conceptual level analysis and
implementation considerations. Project level detailed analysis will be purview of the implementation
parties after the regional plans are adopted. Detailed facility level planning is beyond the scope of
regional plans. Mr. Ashley asked the Council to help identify existing local plans (comprehensive and
water and wastewater master plans) or proposed projects that should be considered for the Middle
Ocmulgee planning region.
The next steps of management practices include:
    • Resource Assessment Models – Available January 2010
    • Gap Analysis – January to March 2010
    • Initial discussion, selection, and refinement of Management Practices – Council Meetings 5, 6,
        and 7
    • Finalize selection by December 2010
Mr. Ashley then discussed an example from Athens-Clarke County using both economical and non-
economical criteria to rank options for long-term wastewater treatment and disposal.
In response to the earlier question on examples of real water supply shortage and flow deficiency, Mr.
Ashley mentioned that in the early 1980’s the City of Athens had a withdrawal permit of 19 to 20 million
gallons per day (mgd), but had to cut down to less than 15 mgd to get through drought. In the 1950’s,
Griffin built a reservoir as a result of a drought.
8) Joint Meeting Planning
David Ashley gave a brief presentation on planning for joint meetings. The objectives of the joint
meetings are 1) to provide the council members with a working knowledge of the resource assessments,
both the process and the results, and 2) to facilitate understanding of the resource assessments and allow
planning to move forward with Gap Analysis and Management Practices Selection. The two upcoming
meetings that may be of most interest to the Middle Ocmulgee Council are scheduled for:
    •   Friday, January 22, 2010, in Macon for Altamaha, Ocmulgee & Oconee River Basins and Eastern
        Coastal Plain Cretaceous, Piedmont Aquifers, and
    •   Friday, January 15, 2010, in Americus for Flint & Ochlockonee River Basins and Dougherty
        Plain, Claiborne Aquifers
Mr. Ashley reiterated Chairman Richardson’s invitation for all members to attend the joint meeting as it
would be a good opportunity to gather additional information and to learn about the results of the resource
assessment. A sign-up sheet was passed out to the members (see attached).
                                                                                                         14
 
                                                                                         Meeting Summary
                                                        Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                       December 01, 2009
9) Preparation of Draft Plan/Table of Contents
Ted Hendrickx of EPD spoke briefly to the council regarding the layout and principal elements of the
Regional Water Development and Conservation Plan (Regional Plan) and its table of contents (TOC) and
asked the council to provide input on what they would like to see in the draft plan. He stated that the
Regional Plan is to be completed in 2011 will serve to guide funding decision by GEFA and permitting
decision by EPD. The planning contractors will be preparing an interim product at the end of this year
that will include background sections of this draft plan for review by the council and EPD. EPD will
provide a draft TOC in a few weeks for the council’s comment and feedback. Ted discussed potentially
forming a small sub-committee to work on review of draft plan TOC between now and January 2010.
10) Local Elected Officials Comments
There were no comments by local elected officials.
11) Public Comment
There were no public comments.
12) Meeting Wrap-up
Mrs. Weber distributed the calendars for March 2010 to the Council to aid in scheduling the next meeting.
EPD’s goal is to have the next meeting between March 15 and 26. She also asked members to nominate
host site for next meeting and provide contact site and name on the calendar. The host site needs to be
large enough to accommodate close to 50 people. She distributed the evaluation forms for Council
Meeting #4.
Ms. Su announced that the last two pages of the Municipal and Industrial Water Demand Forecast Update
handout include a questionnaire on wholesale and large industrial water customers and a regional input
form from EPD for water providers. The council members can pass along the forms to their local water
departments if they have not already provided feedback to EPD or to the planning contractors. She
mentioned that JJG plans to follow up with providers who have not provided feedback. Chairman
Richardson also asked council members to provide him with feedbacks or information.
Additional Council Questions/Comments
Question: Council member Van Whaler is no longer with Butts County, will he stay on?
Answer: Yes, Butts County has asked him to remain their representative on this council.
Question: What happens when people don’t come to meetings?
Answer: We have contacted those individuals prior to each meeting. [Note from Planning Contractor:
We keep an attendance record for all meetings. We plan to send a 24-hour reminder in addition to the
meeting notices. The Chairman is informed of the attendance and has agreed to contact members who
have missed more than two meetings. There are only two members who have missed two or more
meetings from this council.]
                                                                                                       15
 
                                                                                           Meeting Summary
                                                          Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                         December 01, 2009
Comment: It doesn’t feel like we’re accomplishing anything.
Chairman Richardson expressed his frustration as well, but encouraged the members to stay with the
process. He stated that he had personally directed the Planning Contractor to contact all major water
providers so we can get more feedback and better data for the plan.
Question: Is there a draft water plan already written? The Metro Plan? Can we review the Metro Plan
to see what we like and don’t like about it?
Answer: There is a plan for the Metro North Georgia Water Planning District, but there is not a plan for
the planning regions. This is what the regional council is being asked to work on. EPD is working on a
template/style guide. The Metro Plan is public information and is available on its website -
http://www.northgeorgiawater.com/ The council members can review to see if they like the layout and
content.
Question: All of this effort was under the direction of Dr. Couch. Now that we are under a new director,
are we under the same direction?
Answer: Yes, we are still on the path. Director Barnes fully supports the work of the regional water
councils and the implementation of State Water Plan. His memo to the council is available on-
http://www.georgiawaterplanning.org/documents/DirectorBarnesMemotoRegionalWaterPlanningCouncil
s11.9.09.pdf
Question: What’s going on with Task Force, is our council not acting fast enough?
Answer: We are not on same schedule as the Task Force. The Task Force’s focus is to fill the water
supply gap created by the Judge’s ruling if the ruling holds. It will have impacts on the regional water
councils indirectly. Some of Gwinnett County’s wastewater discharge ends up in the Middle Ocmulgee
Basin and we don’t know what the impact is yet. 
Meeting adjourned at 2:45 PM.
13) Summary of Action Items
    •    PC to update PIP to reflect results of the meeting
    •    PC to prepare an executive summary of Middle Ocmulgee Council Meeting to media
    •    PC to send media list to council members and revise based on feedbacks
Attachments
‐   Joint Meeting Sign-up Results
                                                                                                         16
 
                                                                                        Meeting Summary
                                                       Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                      December 01, 2009
Meeting Attendees
Council Members in attendance
Russ Adams                                             Paul Leath
Tony Bass                                              Larry McSwain
John Bembry                                            Hal Newberry
Jason Briley                                           Harvey Norris
Blair Cleveland                                        Eva Persons
Ben Copeland Jr.                                       Barry Peters
Keith Dalton                                           Robert Ray
Jerry Davis                                            Elmo Richardson
Robert Dickey                                          Tony Rojas
Richard Haddock                                        Terry Scarborough
Jim Ham                                                William Whitten
Bobby Hamby                                            Thomas Whicker
Charlie Harris
 
Council Members not in attendance
Jay Matthews                                           Van Whaler
William Lazenby
 
Staff in attendance
Kevin Farrell (EPD)                                    Tai-Yi Su (JJG)
Ted Hendrickx (EPD)                                    Charlotte Weber (JJG)
David Ashley (JJG)                                     Clay Zielinski (JJG)
Guest Speakers in attendance
Tanya Blalock (Georgia Power)
Dr. Jim Kennedy (EPD)
Dr. Wei Zeng (EPD)
Partnering Agencies and General Public
*Adriane Wood (Department of Community Affairs - DCA)
*Keegan Malone (Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission)
*Ted Will (GA Department of Natural Resources)
Skip Langley (Regional Representative for Senator Johnny Isakson)
Bill Stembridge (Regional Representative for Senator Saxby Chambliss)
Mark Wyzalek (Macon Water Authority)
Cliff Bowden (Georgia Farm Bureau)
Kenneth Sheets (Bibb County)
Bob Hargrove
Guy Pihers (Clayton County Water Authority)
Don McGough (Georgia Farm Bureau)
Brad Bohannon (Georgia EMC)
                                                                                                      17
 
                                                                                     Meeting Summary
                                                    Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #4
                                                                                   December 01, 2009
Mike Hopkins (Newton County Water and Sewer Authority)
Scott Thackson (Georgia Forestry Commission)
Bill Foley
*Indicates attendee represented a partnering agency
                                                                                                   18
 
  