Memorandum
To:          Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Planning Council
From:        Rick Brown and Brian Keel, CDM
Date:        09/30/09
Subject: Council Meeting 3 - Summary
This memorandum documents the meeting summary of the Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water
Planning Council Meeting (CM) 3 (CM is also used to denote Council Member), on September
23, 2009 at the C.E. Weir Center in Douglas.
1) Welcome and Introductions/Recap Council Meeting 2/Approve Agenda/ Approve CM2
    Summary
    Chair Darvin Eason led the Council in prayer and initiated the morning session of Council
    Meeting 3. Mayor Jackie Wilson gave a welcome to all in attendance. The Public
    Attendees introduced themselves at the request of the Chair. The Chair presented the
    Agenda and the Council approved the Agenda. Location and possible dates for Council
    Meeting 4 were discussed. The dates available for the next meeting are November 9th
    through 20th. The Planning Contractor (PC) proposed November 10th as a possible date
    for Council Meeting 4. It was agreed that Council would finalize the date at the end of the
    meeting.
    The PC presented a recap of Council meeting 2, summarizing what was accomplished in
    CM 2, and provided an overview of where the Council was in the planning process. A
    summary of results of the evaluation forms from Council Meeting 2 was also presented.
    The Chair asked if the Council had any questions on the Council Meeting 2 Summary and
    requested the approval of the Summary. Council member Donald H. McCallum made a
    motion to approve Council Meeting 2 Summary. The motion was seconded by Scott
    Downing and the Council approved the Meeting 2 Summary with a unanimous vote.
    The meeting continued with an overview of the objectives for Council Meeting 3. These
    included:
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 2
       •   Identifying Region-specific water resources goals to assist in future evaluation of
           water resources management practices;
       •   Review population data and discuss their use in water needs forecasts;
       •   Review draft complete Agricultural water needs forecasts and discuss Industrial
           water demands;
       •   Discuss management practice concepts and planning resources; and
       •   Resource Assessment Information – Increase our understanding of Suwannee-
           Satilla groundwater and management.
2) Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Plan – Goals and Objectives
   The PC made a presentation on the possible Vision and Goals for the Suwannee-Satilla
   Planning Region. The vision statement from the State Water Plan was shown to the
   Council members to get the members thinking on possible vision statements for the
   Suwannee-Satilla region. The PC then showed vision statements that were provided by
   two Council Members who had completed the Vision and Goals exercise that was sent out
   prior to the meeting. The vision statements from the Council members were as follows:
           “Georgia manages water resources in a sustainable manner under Georgia’s regulated
           riparian and regulated reasonable use laws to support the state’s economy, to protect public
           health and natural resources and to enhance the quality of life for all citizens while
           preserving the private property rights of Georgia’s landowners”.
           “Georgia manages water resources in a sustainable manner under Georgia’s regulated
           riparian law to support the State’s economy, to protect public health and natural systems
           and to enhance the quality of life for all citizens while preserving the private property
           rights of Georgia’s landowners”.
A short summary of the discussion, question/comments is provided below:
       •   Are we doing a vision for the state of GA or the Suwannee-Satilla Region? PC
           Response: It will be a vision statement for the Suwannee-Satilla Planning Region.
       •   I’m happy to see “regulated riparian law” included in the vision statement.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 3
       • A Council member brought up the point of including protection for sustainability
         of agriculture in the vision statement. PC suggested keeping the vision statement broad
         and then adding specific goals.
       • Agriculture is an important part of South Georgia and is a most important source
         of economy so we need to see a way to incorporate it in the mission statement.
       • Will forestry be included under Agriculture?
       • The vision statement should say regional economy, as agriculture is an inseparable
         part of the regional economy. PC suggested that vision statement could be modified to
         say “state and regional economy” if the Council agreed.
       • Need to include enhancing natural resources through building reservoirs.
       • The vision statement is lacking on using water for recreational purposes, like
         water parks, fishing etc. Public use of waterways for recreation could be a possible
         goal.
       • Let’s move to the forecasts so we have a better understanding of what we need
         and then come back to the specific Goals that we can add and refine based on our
         needs.
       • Agriculture is a broader umbrella under which forestry and other agricultural
         sectors fall.
       •  Include the enhancement of water supply resources considering the need to
         enhance resource augmentation as a possible statement in the vision.
       • Need to touch on concepts for property owners.
   The PC then listed goals that were received from some of the Council members:
       • Preserve Private property rights.
       • Preserve healthy agriculture and forestry economies.
       • Manage ground and surface water for industrial growth and retention.
       • Ensuring water quality and quantity to support population and employment growth while
         protecting natural habitats.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 4
       •   Sustain surface and groundwater resources in the Suwannee-Satilla Region for use by
           current and future generations living in the region.
       •   Maintain and protect water quality.
       •   Improve cost effective water management
       •   Utilization of water resources for Industrial growth and retention
The Council had a discussion on the possible goals for the Suwannee-Satilla Region.
       •   We should restore and protect our water resources in a way that we don’t
           maintain status quo but improve our water resources.
       •   We could have a goal statement that says maintain, restore and protect water
           quantity and water quality and enhance water resources.
       •   When we talk about restoring our water resources we should probably include a
           statement that says we restore water to scientifically acceptable standards.
       •   Regional economy should be a priority.
       •   The Council stressed the importance of agriculture and forestry and recognized
           that it needed to be included in the goals.
       •   Use of water to maintain inexpensive resources could be a possible goal. Member
           quoted a few examples such as the upcoming biomass plant in the region and the
           electricity plant in Washington County.
       •   Enhance base flows were needed.
       •   Control resources for water parks and other water amenities.
       It was concluded that the PC would work on the Vision statement based on Council
       input and submit it for Council approval after lunch. It was also decided that based on
       the discussion a draft version of possible goals would be circulated to the Council
       Members by e-mail prior to CM4.
3) Role of Water Planning Council – Preparing Georgia’s Water Plan
   The PC played the video message from Governor Sonny Perdue. The copy of the letter of
   designation from Dr. Couch to the Chair delegating the responsibility for developing the
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 5
   Water Development and Conservation Plan for the Region to the Suwannee-Satilla
   Regional Council was presented to the Council. The PC described the process of pacing
   the Water Planning process, emphasizing the need to lay a solid foundation to the process.
   A key goal of the process is to balance traditional use of water and non-consumptive use
   to meet the needs of current and future generations.
   The PC explained the key roles of the Planning Council as described in the Planning
   Guidance Document. Key Council responsibilities would include coming up with the
   Vision and Goals for the planning region, performing the gap analysis based on the
   combined Council and EPD input on forecasts and resource capacity, and developing
   management practices that will address these issues, which will then all combine into the
   Regional Water Plan for the planning region.
   The EPD will review the Regional Water Plan to ensure it follows the State Water Plan,
   Planning Guidance, and addresses the Vision and Goals put forth by the Council. The
   following comments were made regarding the PowerPoint presentation:
       •  The boxes at the bottom of the “Key Roles of the Planning Council” diagram
          represent products provided by EPD, including demand forecasts and resource
          assessments.
       •  We need to get information on resources and projections from all other districts, so
          that we have an idea of what is going on in all other regions and to ensure that all
          the councils are looking at the same thing. The PC mentioned that the first joint
          meeting between Councils is scheduled for January.
       •  The Vice Chair stressed the need for reservoirs, mentioning that there are no new
          reservoirs in the northern part of the State and we need to push the State to do it.
       •  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permitting issues associated with ponds greater
          than 10 acres were mentioned.
       •  Another Council member mentioned that water usage went up by 10% in the
          Metro North District as soon as the water restrictions were taken off.
       •  The recent floods in Atlanta came up for discussion, with the mention of
          developers playing around the regulations in building houses in floodplains.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 6
   The Council then went on a short break. After the break a quick demo of the water
   planning website was given by the PC. The PC then gave a quick summary of the Lake
   Lanier Ruling. The following questions/comments were discussed.
       •   What if the ruling sustains? The PC responded saying that he was not sure of all the
           actions that the State would consider but explained in similar situations that
           reauthorization could be one possible action.
       •   Questions were raised as to the range of alternatives considered if the ruling held.
       •   A Council member had a question as to whether Desalination was being
           considered. The PC responded that it would be dealt under management practices later in
           the day.
4) Review Population Projections and Discussion of Method for Developing Water and
   Wastewater Forecasts
   The PC introduced the topic with the different elements in the development of the
   regional water plan and the positioning of the forecasts in the overall schedule. Though
   the population projections are a little behind schedule, comments are being addressed by
   the Office of Planning and Budget (OPB) and the Carl Vinson Institute of Government
   (CVIOG) and final projections are expected to be available in October.
   The PC introduced the Water and Wastewater Forecast Workgroup that is developing a
   “White Paper” on forecasting methodologies. EPD and the PCs suggested that an Ad Hoc
   group of local water and wastewater experts be formed so that region specific input can
   be obtained on developing the methodology for the municipal forecasts. Two meeting are
   being organized, one in Columbus (09/28/2009) and the other in Augusta (10/02/2009).
   The Chair was entrusted with the task of identifying up to 5 Council and non-Council
   members as representatives to participated in this Ad Hoc group.
   Representatives for the Suwannee-Satilla Council include the Assistant Utilities Director
   of Valdosta, Scott Downing, Joe Hopkins, Brian Tolar (Georgia Agribusiness Council) and
   Grady Thompson. Council members mentioned that representatives from Moody Air
   Force Base and Langdale Industries might give valuable input related to industrial
   forecasts to the Council. Since the goal is to keep a reasonable number of Ad Hoc group
   members, it was decided that any questions or concerns from Council members would be
   submitted to Cliff Lewis and he would in turn present those points in the meeting. The
   following questions/comments were discussed:
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 7
       • Approximately 16,000 people were not counted in Tift County in the last census.
         This is a significant portion of the population. PC Response: If only half the people
         were counted when it comes to calculating the per capita demand, the gallons per capita per
         day (gpcd) would be large. Even though population numbers are not precise, the current
         water use would be known which would enable a reasonable forecast being made.
       • There was a question of different planning regions using different numbers,
         specifically what Metro North Georgia Planning District was doing. PC Response:
         Page 37 of the State Water Plan says the following “The 2008 updates of the water plans of
         the Metropolitan North Georgia Planning District are scheduled for completion in
         December of 2008. These updates must also be consistent with the provisions of this plan,
         which may require additional planning time as provided by O.C.G.A 12-5-574(c).The
         Metro North plan will be conformed to those of the other regions in the next planning cycle
         in five years.
       • What are the thoughts of the other councils on the population numbers? PC
         Response: Not sure about all Councils, but in the Coastal region transient populations
         were really important those related to military bases, college campuses and recreational
         homes.
       • Based on comments the linkage between population and employment has been
         deemphasized. Employment projections are principally needed for industrial
         forecasts. Currently it is anticipated that the top 12 highest water consuming
         industries will be used in developing the industrial forecasts.
       • Are we using an average water use for these industries? PC we have not yet received
         the methodology.
       • Are we taking known municipal water use rates and extrapolating for rural areas
         (wells and other) so that they are also captured in the total municipal water use
         numbers? PC Response: No not initially we are trying to get actual use data for self
         supplied domestic water users but we will need to see how much data there is. You could
         utilize an extrapolation approach as well but initially we are looking to have specific self
         supply data. The 2005 USGS report recommends 75 gpcd as a starting point.
       • All our discussions are around demands. We need to focus and project what our
         supply is and how we plan our supplies to continue to be available in the future.
         PC Response: We will discuss supply options as part of management practices.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 8
       • Will our plan be implemented? Will EPD hear what we say? PC Response: EPD will
         consider the Suwannee-Satilla plan. EPD Response: Dr. Couch is committed to making
         this the Council’s plan. State law is the standing guidance on the implementation of the
         plan and as long as the plan adheres to the law and meets the Council’s vision and goals,
         EPD will adopt it.
       • Is the 75 to 175 gpcd water demand a region specific number? PC Response: Yes, it
         is a number for the southeast region, taken from the USGS Report.
       • Does anybody know the gpcd for all the planning regions? PC Response: Yes, we
         will get numbers for all the regions; they are included in the USGS Report. We will try to
         have answers to the Council’s related to the following questions by CM4: How many water
         users were included in the data collection per planning region? What percentage of the
         population/total water use does it represent?
       • How do we quantify the water use in different power production processes which
         vary based on the technology being used? PC Response: Will be addressed in energy
         forecasts.
       • Explain consumptive use? Are septic tanks consumptive use? PC Response:
         Consumptive use is any loss from the immediate water supply, not from the water cycle.
       • How do we segregate indoor versus outdoor use? Lawn watering, car washing
         would all be included in outdoor water use. How do we capture outdoor water
         use? EPD Response: EPD Resource Assessment experts can answer these questions. We
         can either have a preliminary meeting or discuss with the Chair to bring in some of these
         experts in the next Council Meeting. You can also send in your questions. I can forward it
         to the respective experts and have the answers in the next council meeting.
       • We need to understand the dynamics of the different aquifers and their recharges.
         PC response: This wWill be addressed in the Resource assessments session, we can also
         bring in Dr. Jim Kennedy, State Geologist, to our next meeting.
       • Where were the data for the major water using industries in Georgia obtained
         from? Which year or time period does it represent? PC Response: Data was obtained
         from the USGS and EPD Permit Report. Period not known. Trend data was from 1980-
         2005.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 9
       •   Is poultry captured in the 12 industries? EPD Response: Parts of it may be captured; if
           they are supplied by a major utility. We need to confirm if they are self supplied if that is
           captured in the data.
       •   Does metal capture the auto industry? EPD Response: Not sure but can find out.
       •   Is energy part of this? EPD Response: Energy is captured separately, but will double
           check to confirm.
       •   How were these industries selected? PC response: These industries were selected
           because they are the top water-using industries in the State and together represent
           approximately 90% of the total industrial water use in the State.
       •   EPD comment: The water plan will be visited every 5 years, but if portions of it need to be
           revisited sooner due to regional changes we will consider that.
       •   Can you make the PowerPoint available in the website prior to the meeting? PC
           Response: We want to have the Council look at the PowerPoint before it is posted so that
           any changes or modifications based on Council input could be made before presenting it on
           the website.
       The council took a break for lunch and reconvened after 45 minutes.
5) Draft Complete Agriculture Water Needs Forecasts
   Dr. Jim Hook with the University of Georgia College of Agriculture and Environmental
   Sciences presented the draft complete Agriculture Water Needs Forecasts. Cliff Lewis,
   Assistant Branch Chief with EPD, introduced Dr. Hook and mentioned that he would
   address the Council’s questions from CM 2 after Dr. Hook’s presentation.
   Dr. Hook presented an overview of the Agricultural Forecasts available at:
   www.nespal.org/sirp/waterinfo/state/awd/AgWaterDemand.htm. Agricultural
   Irrigation water demand was projected for groundwater and surface water sources for the
   years 2011-2050. The forecasts included a wet, normal and dry year to plan for the range
   of weather conditions that might be encountered. The projected withdrawal quantity for
   each county is dependent on the following three factors:
       •   Projected irrigated area in acres for a crop
       •   Projected monthly irrigation application depth in inches
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 10
       •   Proportion of irrigation water derived from a source
   The product, monthly withdrawal by crop, was summed for the county. The withdrawal
   in acre-inches was converted to million gallons per day for ease of comparison with the
   other water use numbers.
   Irrigated areas were determined based on 2007-2008 aerial imagery; permits issued by
   EPD, the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission’s Agriculture Meter Program,
   and University of Georgia Agriculture Water Demand GIS efforts. Projected growth rate
   for each year for each crop was based on the arithmetic average of projections from three
   economics based models: United States, Southeast Regional, and Georgia Data. While the
   national model makes predictions based on market conditions and worldwide demand
   for major commodities, the regional models better reflect choices of farmers in Southeast
   and Georgia.
   Corn, cotton, peanuts, soybeans and pecans make up approximately 85% of Georgia’s
   irrigated crop area. Vegetables and specialty crops like sod, ornamental nurseries and
   berries make up much less of Georgia’s water demand. However these crops have
   significant water demand and have a lot of regional significance. It was assumed that
   these crops would continue to be produced and their future growth rates would equal the
   aggregate growth rate of the five major crops.
   Irrigation schedules and monthly totals were computed for weather conditions from 1950-
   2007. Irrigation replaces rainfall deficit. Projections for irrigation depth were made such as
   to support full yield for wet, average and dry growing seasons. Irrigation will continue to
   grow and expand around areas where irrigators have already invested in pumps and
   irrigation hardware. All the rural counties in Georgia show room for modest expansion in
   irrigated fields.
   Users will continue to use the existing water supplies at locations. The surface withdrawal
   rates have been relatively static and withdrawals have grown with pond expansions.
   Groundwater supplies, like the Floridan aquifer, will remain the preferred source. Over
   the years there has been a shift in the type of crops grown, rapid growth in irrigation was
   observed in the mid 70s to 1985 after which the growth has leveled off. The following
   questions/comments from Council were addressed by Dr. Hook:
       •   Is there any provision for agriculture energy market in the forecast? Yes, it is
           included in the USDA forecast.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 11
       •   Can you expand on the future crop production? Most farms are going to produce at a
           similar pattern as historic production but certainly international markets and trade policy
           can affect the trends.
       •   Cotton and peanuts have same percent of irrigated land, did you use an average?
           Yes, these are easily identified rotation crops and we applied averages to rotation crops.
       •   Do we know how much water is available? Dr. Jim Kennedy will address that topic
           under sustainable yield.
       •   Are you taking into consideration extra yield? We are looking at all existing
           technologies. Substantial technology will be driven towards producing crops with higher
           yield.
       •   A 25% loss was assumed for irrigation application.
       •   Need to make sure water use for pine trees is included in the forecasts as it is
           significant in our region.
       •   Non-essential commodities may see a decrease in value in future.
       •   A minor crop in one watershed might be big in another and this should be
           accounted for. Yes, major crops are region specific. For example, sod farming is more
           popular in North Georgia.
       •   Water uses less than 100,000 gallons per days have no permit requirement, so there’s lot of
           water use that we don’t have data on. Non permitted water use will not be reflected in the
           forecasts.
       •   A Council member presented some data on dairy farm water use.
       •   Crops irrigated might change based on the demand, but the land usage and acres of land
           irrigated is less likely to change.
       •   Pine seedlings are included in the nursery forecast. Will come under container nursery or
           field nursery.
       Cliff Lewis went over the questions from Council Meeting 2. The handout is included
       as Attachment A.
6) Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Plan – Goals and Objectives - Continued
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 12
   The PC prepared a draft version of the vision statement based on input received from the
   Council members in the morning. The draft vision statement reads as follows:
   “The vision of the Suwannee-Satilla Regional Council is to manage water resources in a
   sustainable manner under Georgia’s regulated riparian and regulated reasonable use laws
   to support the state’s and region’s economy, to protect public health and natural
   resources and to enhance the quality of life for all citizens while preserving the private
   property rights of Georgia’s landowners, and in consideration of the need to enhance
   resource augmentation and efficiency opportunities.”
   Council member Scott Downing made the motion to approve the Vision statement. The
   motion was seconded by Vice Chair Grady Thompson and the Vision statement was
   approved by Council vote.
7) Resource Assessments
   The PC presented an overview of management practices. The regional water plan must
   include management practices that include water supply, wastewater and stormwater,
   which are interconnected with each other. A few water supply and water quality
   management practices examples were presented. The Coastal Stormwater Supplement
   (CSS) was presented as a source for stormwater best management practices. The CSS
   focuses on low impact development practices along with better site planning and design.
   Based on water use forecasts and resource assessment models, gaps in resources will be
   identified. Management practices will then be selected to fill these gaps. Discussion,
   selection and refinement of management practices will be performed in Council Meetings
   5 and 6. The selected practices will then be evaluated to assess whether or not they close
   future gaps, are consistent with the Councils vision and goals for the region. The selection
   of management practices are expected to be finalized in December 2010. The following
   discussion/comments were made:
       •   If we pay $1.25/1000 gallon for surface water and we get oil from Saudi Arabia,
           why don’t we consider Desalination and piping of water across regions? PC
           Response: Desalination might be easier in Coastal Counties. In general it will cost more
           and the brine solution needs to be disposed off properly without impacting the
           environment. As long as there is an adequate source of groundwater, it is a much cheaper
           source.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 13
       •   Do other states store water underground? PC Response: Many states have conjunctive
           use. Storage in subsurface is a way to reduce evaporation, although subsurface water is a
           little harder to contain and control.
       •   In 24 Coastal Counties there was a 5 year ban on Aquifer Storage and Recovery
           (ASR) which extended. What was the simple reason behind the 24 county ASR
           ban? PC Response: One possible reason is concern over the long-term protection of the
           Floridan aquifer. Do we have any reason from an engineering standpoint not to do
           it? Generally ASR is a feasible alternative but site specific consideration must be taken into
           account.
       •   Expansion of Jacksonville has created pressure in the Brunswick aquifer. Are there
           any regulations that prevent Florida from buying land in Georgia and putting in
           wells? EPD Response: The State of Georgia would have to permit those withdrawals, and
           we would probably not find that to be a wise usage of our groundwater.
8) Resource Assessments
   The PC made a presentation on resource assessments with focus on the assessment of
   Groundwater Availability. The PC presented an overview of Georgia’s aquifers. The
   Coastal Plain Aquifers (Floridan, Cretaceous, Claiborne and Clayton) in southern Georgia
   was the source of water for 86.5% of the groundwater withdrawals. The PC also described
   the criteria that were used in the prioritization of aquifers for determination of sustainable
   yield. A brief summary of the reasons for prioritization of certain aquifers was presented.
   The Coastal Georgia water and wastewater permitting plan for saltwater intrusion was
   briefly described. The following questions/comments from Council were discussed. The
   PC mentioned that all questions raised over the course of the presentation will be
   submitted to Dr. Jim Kennedy and that he would be available to address them at the next
   Council meeting:
       •   The Floridan Aquifer is under the Suwannee-Satilla Region. Will withdrawals
           from the surficial aquifers that are beneath regions upstream (north) of us affect
           groundwater withdrawal in our area? Which other adjoining regions’ withdrawals
           affect aquifers beneath the Suwannee-Satilla region?
       •   Which adjoining regions contribute recharge to the Floridan Aquifer beneath the
           Suwannee-Satilla region? What are recharge rates to the Floridan Aquifer?
       •   Who are the largest users of the Floridan Aquifer?
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 14
        •   Please explain the inter-connectivity between the different aquifers in Georgia. Are
            there breaks in the confining layers between aquifers? Is it more appropriate to
            refer to these as semi-confining layers if water can flow between aquifers?
        •   Please explain the inter-connectivity between aquifers and surface water. Is the
            Floridan recharged by surface waters north of the Suwannee-Satilla region? Is the
            Floridan an unconfined aquifer north of the Suwannee-Satilla region?
        •   How does pumping affect surface water levels? Does pumping from the Floridan
            Aquifer affect groundwater levels in the surficial aquifer? What factors other than
            pumping rate affect the size of the cone of depression?
9) Preparing for Joint meetings between Councils
    The PC presented an overview of the need to coordinate with adjacent Councils as water
    and aquifer boundaries are shared between planning regions. The joint meetings will help
    establish communication channels and come up with management practices that address
    shared resources. The preliminary groupings for the joint meetings were presented and
    the PC mentioned that a copy of the grouping would be circulated to the Council
    members via e-mail. The Council wanted to know if the layman view of riparian rights
    will be addressed by Dr. Jim Kennedy. Cliff Lewis offered to present it at the next meeting
    with any additional input from Council member Gordon Rogers.
10) Planning Resources
    The PC provided an overview of the Planning Guidance Document and a copy of the
    document was distributed to all the Council members. Schedules for the different
    components of the planning process were discussed. The draft plan has to be submitted
    by January 2011 and based on EPD and public comment the recommended plan will be
    finalized on June 30, 2011. The Public Involvement Plan (PIP) was discussed and the PC
    explained the need for the Council to adopt a PIP based on the template provided in the
    Planning Guidance document. The Council can fill in and add/modify the template to
    create the PIP. The PC suggested that a subcommittee with a few volunteers be formed to
    complete a draft version prior to CM4 for Council review. Mayor Jackie Wilson, Wesley
    Langdale, and Gordon Rogers volunteered to work with the PC on the development of
    the draft PIP. The PC also provided a few examples of water plans from other states. The
    presentation included the need for water plans, the process involved, what were the
    forecasted demands, and management practices selected to address those demands.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 3 Summary
09/30/09
Page 15
11) Local Elected Official Comments
    There were no local elected official comments.
12) Public Comments
    Trish St. John from The Nature Conservancy circulated handouts regarding the St. Marys
    River Management Plan (website www.saintmarysriver.org) and mentioned to let her
    know if her organization could help in any way.
    Brent Dykes with the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission handed out maps
    showing permitted sites within the Suwannee-Satilla planning region. Don Harrison with
    Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Fisheries Division thanked the Council and
    mentioned that he could help the Council if they needed any data related to fisheries.
    William Fowler with the Moody Air Force Base thanked the Council for their service and
    mentioned to let him know if his organization could help in any way.
13) Wrap-up and What to Expect Next Meeting
    Dates for the next Council meeting were discussed. The motion to hold the next Council
    meeting on November 11th was made by Gordon Rogers and seconded by Greg Evans.
    The Council agreed by vote to hold the next meeting in Douglas, GA on November 11th,
    2009.
14) Council Meeting 3 Evaluations
    The PC distributed the evaluation forms and members of Council filled out the forms. The
    PC collected the forms. The meeting was adjourned.
cc: Cliff Lewis, EPD
      Council Members Attendance List
Suwannee-Satilla Council Members   9/23/2009
   1   Joseph L. Boyett                X
   2   Earl Brice                      X
   3   William L. Brim                 X
   4   Hanson R. Carter
   5   Carroll H. Coarsey
   6   Ben Copeland                    X
   7   Scott Downing                   X
   8   Eugene Dyal                     X
   9   Darvin Eason                    X
  10   Michael E. Edgy                 X
  11   Greg C. Evans                   X
  12   Greg Goggans                    X
  13   Jim Hedges
  14   Alva Joseph Hopkins
  15   Donald A. Johnson
  16   John Wesley Langdale            X
  17   Joe Lewis                       X
  18   R.R. Rusty McCall               X
  19   Donald H. McCallum              X
  20   Dan Raines                      X
  21   Scotty Raines
  22   S. Gordon Rogers                X
  23   Jay Shaw
  24   Frank G. Sisk                   X
  25   Miles A. Stone                  X
  26   Linda Tanner
  27   Grady M. Thompson               X
  28   Doyle Weltzbarker               X
  29   James R. Willis                 X
  30   Jackie Wilson                   X
                            Totals    22
                         Public Attendance List
    Public Attendee         9/23/2009                 Representing
 1 Brittney Foster               X     Packaging Corp of America
 2 Tom Putnam                    X     Langdale Industries
 3 Rahn Milligan                 X     GSWCC
 4 William Fowler                X     Moody Airforce Base
 5 Don Harrison                  X     GA DNR Fisheries
 6 Trish St. John                X     The Nature Conservancy
 7 Angela Wall                   X     SGRC
 8 John Eunice                   X     Moody Airforce Base
 9 Elvis Lane                    X     Moody Airforce Base
10 Brent Dykes                   X     GSWCC
11 Terrell Jacobs                X     City of Douglas
12 Rich Batten                   X     SGRC
                    Totals      12
 