Memorandum
To:         Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Planning Council
From:       Rick Brown and Brian Keel, CDM
Date:       11/12/10
Subject: Council Meeting 8 - Summary
This memorandum provides the meeting summary of the Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water
Planning Council Meeting 8 (CM8), held on October 27, 2010 at Wiregrass Technical College
in Fitzgerald, Georgia.
1) Welcome and Introductions/Recap CM 7/Approve Agenda/Approve CM7 Summary
    Chair Darvin Eason called the meeting to order and asked Scott Downing to welcome the
    Council. Scott welcomed the Council and also introduced Jeff Lewis, the General
    Manager of Fitzgerald Utilities, and asked Mr. Lewis to add some opening remarks. Mr.
    Lewis welcomed the Council and indicated the City was happy to be hosting this meeting.
    The Chairman also introduced special guest attendees from the Suwannee River Water
    Management District (SRWMD) in Florida.
    Chairman Eason provided an overview of the agenda and kicked off the meeting.
    Chairman Eason asked the public to introduce themselves and then asked the PC to
    proceed with the first agenda item. The PC asked for approval of the CM 7 Summary;
    Mike Edgy moved for approval, second by Scott Downing and Council unanimously
    approved the summary. Next the PC asked for approval of the agenda; Scott Downing
    moved for approval, second by Gordon Rogers and Council unanimously approved the
    agenda.
    The location and possible dates for Council Meeting 9 and 10 were discussed. The PC
    suggested December 8 in Douglas and January 12 in Adel (originally suggested Douglas
    but in honor of our Chair the location was changed to Adel); Council approved the
    proposed dates and locations.
    The PC then provided feedback that was received regarding CM 7; 100 percent of those
    providing feedback found the meeting to be extremely useful.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 2
   The Chairman and PC then gave a recap of the October 6th Joint Meeting in Macon and
   thanked all those that were able to attend and especially those Council members that
   served on panels. The Chairman indicated that for the first time he heard representatives
   from the Metro North District asking for help. He also mentioned that the Coastal Georgia
   Council is considering treating stormwater and injecting it into the aquifers.
   The PC then provided a recap of the Macon Joint Meeting highlighting the following
   points:
       •   The meeting was a panel format with 4 panels; focusing on water quality,
           agricultural water use, water supply needs, local government, neighboring, and
           state coordination. The meeting was well attended by all Councils with over 50
           Council members and about 50 interested public/stakeholders.
       •   A few themes/key points discussed at the meeting: the meeting provided a good
           overview of the progress being made by various Councils; many regions do not
           have gaps; funding is a major challenge; additional data collection/ improvement,
           and adaptive management should be the foundational approach to the current and
           future water plans.
   CM – Where will the additional funding come from?
   PC – Funding will be a major challenge and some different ideas have surfaced starting
   with recommending that existing funding sources such as the Georgia Environmental
   Finance Authority Funds should be stabilized and “refunded”. Council should provide
   any suggestions they may have for new funding sources or ideas.
   CM – Doyle and Gordon both participated in panels and did a very good job. It was a
   great meeting to learn more about each Council.
   The meeting continued with an overview of the following objectives for Council Meeting
   8:
       •   Review current and future conditions resource assessment model results and
           Selection of draft Management Practices for Regional Water Resources
       •   Review and discuss Energy Forecasts
       •   Review and discuss Initial Water Plan Sections
       •   Discuss and develop targeted outreach to further communicate with, and solicit
           input from, local governments, water and wastewater utilities, and other key
           stakeholders
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 3
       •    Review and discuss schedule for completing Regional Water Plan; identify next
           steps for Shared Resources Discussion
2) Selection of Draft Management Practices
   The PC initiated a discussion of draft management practices and handed out a Draft
   Management Practices table. The PC emphasized that the handout is a DRAFT product of
   the previous Council work and the recent work of the Council’s Management Practices
   Subcommittee.
   The PC explained the goal of the morning discussion is to start a big picture discussion of
   practices and by afternoon to try to reach consensus on the practices that should be
   included in the plan. One this overview is complete we will then get into details of gap
   quantities and specific measures to address them later in the day. The PC reminded
   Council that we want to revisit Vision and Goals between now and next meeting and
   make sure we’re still happy with them.
   The PC provided a handout summarizing the management practices by resource
   (groundwater, surface water, and water quality). The PC highlighted groundwater as a
   very important resource. There is no groundwater gap in our region, but there is a future
   need. The PC talked through preliminary recommended groundwater management
   practices.
   CM: What do you mean “continue to develop Upper Floridan”?
   PC: Continue drilling wells to supply water from the Upper Floridan Aquifer. Council
   asked the PC to provide some more specific language to be clearer about this practice
   The PC discussed Tier 1-4 conservation practices from the Water Conservation
   Implementation Plan (WCIP).
   CM: This was also spelled out in a memo from Linda.
   PC: Yes, and we have a copy of that for everyone here.
   The PC handed out the memo from Linda MacGregor.
   CM: We should continue to develop the Upper Floridan – this is an important part of our
   plan. We need to start putting industries where water is. We need to encourage some of
   the more water-intensive industries to come here where the water is.
   CM: How can you continue to promote industry around Atlanta when you don’t have
   water?
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 4
   CM: We don’t have the population workforce here to attract industry.
   CM: We have 1,000 people unemployed here now; Coffee County probably has a couple
   thousand.
   CM: Can you explain Tier 3 and 4?
   PC: Refer to page 3 of the table of Management Practices under Water Conservation for
   Tier 3 and 4 for Agricultural practices. These are not “one size fits all” and noted that
   everyone doesn’t have to do each practice 100%.
   CM: Are we talking about using these on Groundwater development too?
   PC: Yes, good point, we need to make that clear in the table.
   CM: We can probably get more money from NRCS and SWCC for conservation.
   PC: You hit the nail on the head. We can make a recommendation to the State: Continue to
   support SWCC programs and work to leverage federal funds to encourage full
   implementation of water plan.
   CM: Also continue the use of incentives.
   CM: We see more people signing up than we have money for. If we lobby for money to do
   that will help improve the level of implementation of these types of practices.
   CM: We need to encourage practices but at same time encourage incentives to implement
   practices.
   CM: Encourage them as they are economically viable. You have to have the right
   economic environment for these incentives. It’s very important we include this in the Plan
   this way.
   CM: Encourage voluntary.
   CM: I think we’re trying to say we don’t want to develop practices that conflict with and
   detract funding from existing SWCC programs and funding.
   CM: Within the 40-year planning horizon, irrigation technology will make today’s
   practices obsolete. Encourage development of better efficiency irrigation. Center pivots
   will become obsolete, maybe in 10 years, maybe 20. We need to look at the big picture.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 5
   CM: Subsurface irrigation is being implemented now. We can work in harmony with
   practices we’re already doing with NRCS.
   PC: That’s great, but we can’t leave it as saying “we’re already doing that”. Our Plan has
   to show how we’re going to make it better. If we’re implementing conservation, we need
   to quantify how much saving/demand reduction we can expect and what that will do to
   help close the gap. We understand we don’t want to hurt ourselves with
   recommendations that turn into negative impacts to the end users, but we have to work
   within the goal of having some level of quantifiable practices.
   CM: Don’t make practices mandatory; educate people to why they should do this.
   CM: Sounds like we need to maybe push back. People at the Stripling Center Irrigation
   Research Park say there’s probably 10-15% additional savings from full implementation of
   existing irrigation technology. Talk to those researchers and confirm this savings, and if
   we fully implement that adjust these gaps to show us what we’d save. Put some numbers
   to it.
   PC: Since surface water demand is on a node basis, it’s easy to quantify. This is the level of
   specificity we want to go to and then have “benchmarks” to monitor progress.
   CM: Implementation is not automatic. People have to actually use this technology.
   CM: Strike “eliminate” from “use of high pressure systems” on the list and use a different
   word. Some systems have to use high-pressure.
   PC: We need to identify where additional data and refinements are needed. Our
   Subcommittee said to focus on gap frequency, duration, and severity. They also feel we
   need additional information on agricultural consumptive use. Not all agree with 100%
   consumption. They also see the need for additional information on dual source of supply
   and timing of irrigation use from ponds.
   CM: It was clear at Macon Meeting that there was support for restoration of wetlands, and
   additional research is needed and there is potential opportunity between the Altamaha,
   Suwannee-Satilla, and Coastal Councils for 319(h) grant funding opportunities.
   Next the Council and the PC discussed additional water supply practices.
   CM: Some other Councils have the same ideas for improving flows in the smaller
   drainage basins.
   CM: We need to consider moving land application systems to point source discharges.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 6
   CM: I agree, I don’t see this in the management practices list. This needs to be included as
   a water quantity and quality management practices.
   CM: I would also like to propose we consider an inter-basin transfer from the Altamaha
   River to headwaters of the Little Satilla: the Rayonier plant effluent. This will help flows at
   Atkinson.
   CM: On these conservation BMPs such as conservation tillage, we need to give
   consideration to incentives and other programs that they be user friendly. Don’t want the
   solution to become the problem. In order for water users to utilize these practices they
   need to be user friendly.
   CM: I’ve been involved in a program at NRCS for 6 years. Within that time we now have
   to prove everything that we do with documentation and it’s time consuming. Next
   problem we ran into was yield loss on peanuts by not tilling the land. This year we got a
   burrowing bug that cost us 200 dollars per ton on peanuts. I’m not saying do away with
   this program, but we need to be flexible and try not to put so much burden for
   documentation on farmers that have so many other things to do. Now the program is
   costing me more money than it’s saving me and I can’t get out of it.
   CM: Flexibility is critical.
   CM: We need to work it out so programs don’t take so long to implement. Paperwork and
   permits take time… we need to streamline the process for farmers.
   CM: We had substantial conversation about BMPs on County dirt roads. This is a big issue
   in the Satilla basin. We need to expand Management Practices from Forestry for design
   and maintenance of dirt roads. There are several BMPs for this. In Brantley County there
   are no BMPs being implemented for dirt roads.
   CM: Every time the river comes up it blows out roads and the County brings in truckloads
   of dirt to fix the roads. We put riprap and surge stone to stabilize them.
   CM: A major issue I see is County dirt roads are only 30 feet wide or less… not much
   room for a ditch with vegetation. If you try to get a right-of-way to implement these you
   need a wider swath and have to buy it from adjoining land owners.
   CM: I just want to get this on the list.
3) Quantification of Gaps and Needs
   The PC then presented a detailed overview of the quantification of gaps and needs and
   distributed a handout with this information. Time was spent discussing surface water
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 7
   gaps at the nodes in the region and the difference between withdrawal and consumption.
   The PC explained the handouts, which contained graphs showing the volumes of gaps at
   each node and how various management practices could be used to fill those gaps. The
   PC also discussed the frequency, severity, and duration of gaps over the period of record
   and the seasonal variation of surface water gaps from agricultural irrigation.
   There was a discussion of whether Council needs to fill 100% of gaps at a node or is it
   sufficient to select a breakpoint gap that is a more manageable volume and still captures
   the majority of gaps over the period of record. The PC explained that the Subcommittee
   likes this approach but that EPD has not given official approval and that it is important to
   close gaps over time and that may provide the flexibility to allow more understanding of
   the larger infrequent gaps.
   The PC also presented results of a nutrient “hot spot” analysis that was conducted to
   identify land uses in the region that contribute the highest concentrations of nitrogen and
   phosphorus in stormwater runoff. Non-point source pollution management practices to
   address nutrient loads were discussed.
   CM: Including the percent land cover may be misleading because we know we have a lot
   of forest cover but these lands are not really a major source of nutrients.
   CM: Are the nutrient naturally occurring? If they are then we cannot be expected to
   address what is natural.
   PC: Yes they do occur in the soil and organic matter. We have indicated that the sources
   are not specific to a human induced activity.
   CM: I do not like the way some of the forest practices are listed here because they are not
   really applicable to how the BMPs are implemented.
   PC: Good comments we are trying to show that it will take a combined effort of forestry,
   urban and agricultural BMPs. We will work with the subcommittee to develop better
   language.
4) Energy Forecast
   The PC presented an overview of the energy forecast methodology and results. This was
   the last forecast to be completed due to the complexity of the topic and the timing to
   develop a methodology that incorporates information on planned energy facilities and
   longer term forecasting. Similar to the municipal and industrial forecasts, this forecast
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 8
   used an Ad Hoc group of power providers to provide data and help peer review the
   forecast information.
   The PC highlighted that the forecast has several scenarios:
       •   2 - Power generation needs scenarios that include: 1) baseline (1.74% growth,
           following historic trends) and 2) a “reasonable“ high scenario that has energy
           growing at a slightly higher growth rate (2.14%) than the mean trend.
       •   2 – Water Demand scenarios: 1) a scenario that quantifies water demand for
           planned facilities through 2017 and 2) a scenario that quantifies the additional
           water demand required if energy production from existing generating capacity is
           maximized (this scenario does not meet all statewide power needs through the
           forecast horizon).
       •    An Alternative Power Needs Scenario to quantify the total regional and statewide
           water needs to meet forecasted demands through the entire planning horizon.
   The PC noted that the criterion used to determine planned facilities through 2017 was
   based on an accounting of those facilities with a completed Air Quality permit
   application. It was also noted the energy forecast is regional through 2020 (2017). Beyond
   2050 the forecasted need is at the statewide level and has not been distributed to
   individual regions of the state. The forecast did not specifically distribute water needs
   between 2020 and 2050 as this would be highly speculative
   The PC then highlighted some general guidance to Council and made the following
   points:
       •    Even under the 2017 maximum capacity scenario 2050 demands cannot be met.
       •    The location of any additional energy capacity/generation method beyond 2017 is
            not known.
       •    Council can incorporate water withdrawal and consumption information
            associated with known and planned facilities.
       •     For energy water demands associated with power production beyond 2017
            Council may wish to look at this more qualitatively in terms of understanding the
            water resource implication if some additional power generation were to occur
            within the region.
       •    The PC concluded with a summary of the information that will document the
            energy forecast including: A detailed Technical Memorandum; and Executive
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 9
            Summary; the PPT and presentations to Councils; additional guidance to Council
            similar to the above bullets; and a template that can be included in the regional
            plan.
   CM: Why weren’t projects included if they were planned?
   PC: The forecast included planned projects that are most certain going forward, such as
   those that have applied for permits.
   The PC pointed out that maximizing power production from a plant is not necessarily the
   most efficient way to operate the plant.
   CM: What about potential surface water withdrawals for energy where we don’t have gap
   information? The Ocmulgee is in our region but we have no nodes on this river in our
   Region.
   PC: Council can still consider if future energy might come from withdrawals in the region.
   CM: A proposed plant would withdraw from the Ocmulgee in Ben Hill County.
   PC: Since this facility has not applied for an air quality permit it was not included in the
   2017 forecast, but that does not mean that it will not be built to meet the unmet statewide
   demand by resource in our region. There are areas where there are available surface water
   supplies in our region.
5) Guest Presentation by Mr. David Stills and Mr. John Dinges of the SRWMD
   Mr. David Stills and Mr. John Dinges of the SRWMD gave a presentation on water supply
   planning in their District. Mr. Dale Jenkins and Mr. Carlos Heard from the SRWMD were
   also present.
   53% of the Suwannee River basin is in Georgia. We are connected by the River and we
   share many common interests and have similar values. The District depends on
   agriculture for economic stability. Outside influences contribute to water resources
   problems in the District.
   Groundwater feeds springs in the District; groundwater is our surface water, there is no
   difference. Our springs may go dry at Dr. Kennedy’s sustainable yield limits. Georgia and
   South Carolina have been working together for years, why can’t we do the same thing
   with Florida and Georgia? I think it would be good to build on your and our planning
   efforts to address our gaps in a cooperative manner.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 10
   In Florida, environment is ranked equally with human needs. State water law changes
   every year.
   In Tampa, there was a $180M project to build a 25 MGD desalination plant in Tampa
   ($18M year total O&M). It feeds a 15 Billion gallon reservoir ($275M). It is needed to fill a
   gap.
   In South Florida there is a $20B everglades restoration project. Pump station energy costs
   to operate are more than annual Suwannee River WMD operating budget.
   Kissingen Springs in south west Florida was a natural spring in the late 1800’s that is
   dried up now.
   For a long time people in the region thought the Suwannee District has the most springs
   and an endless water supply. Springs in the district provide approximately 70% of flow in
   our rivers. We manage our surface water and groundwater as the same resource. We
   realize your geology may be different but we see affect down here.
   There are 33 Magnitude 1 springs in the State of Florida, 21 in the Suwannee River WMD.
   Magnitude 1 spring discharges 100 cfs or more.
   White springs in North Florida also dried up. The groundwater flow divide has
   encroached upon the District in the northeast part of district, which has lost
   approximately 20% of the groundwater contributing area in the District. We see major
   withdrawals in the Jacksonville area.
   CM: This is a pressure problem, not a quantity problem. You relieve pressure on the
   system and it no longer wells up in the spring.
   CM: Camden County only shows 3 MGD on your map. A paper mill there withdrew 20
   MGD in 2000 (year of map). It no longer withdraws but it’s incorrect on your map.
   SRWMD: We don’t have good data for Georgia. We also don’t have good data on Ag uses
   in our district. This is the only water use in our district that is not metered. We use a
   telemetry system on 20% of our Ag uses that use 80% of Ag water to estimate these uses.
   When we assess water supply, we look at what the demand of water will do to the water
   resource. If you predict it will do harm, you have to establish a planning region to identify
   alternative supplies. We predict an overall groundwater use of 995 MGD from the Upper
   Floridan by 2030.
   EPD: Is aquifer storage and recovery used in Florida?
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 11
   SRWMD: Yes, in southwest Florida.
   CM: Can you speak to that?
   SRWMD: Yes, at the end of the presentation.
   We have groundwater gaps in each of our Water Service Planning Regions and we are
   looking at how to address groundwater gaps with surface water. We cannot pump any
   more groundwater in some of our areas.
   All our systems are very flashy… there is a limited amount of time when you can pull off
   surface water to fill reservoirs… where do you store it? Storage costs money.
   The St. John’s River WMD withdrawals are impacting groundwater levels in the
   Suwannee River WMD and potentially Georgia.
   PC: What advice would you offer Council based on what you heard this morning?
   SRWMD: On the Ag side, we need to be efficient with our water use. More and more
   efficient water use patterns due to technology. You can use conservation as lowest
   hanging fruit but it won’t get you all the way there.
   CM: Speak to land ownership. Major land ownership in south Georgia is by private land
   owners.
   SRWMD: We’ve looked at conservation easements in lieu of fee simple and we own a
   significant amount of land. Conservation Easement allows Ag land to keep doing what
   they’re doing but you’re making sure there’s not more development or concrete put on
   that land. It protects land for recharge and water resource enhancement.
   We also take a non-structural flood management approach… if you live on the river
   you’re going to flood and we’re going to let it flood.
   CM: Can you talk about naturally occurring nutrients?
   SRWMD: There are very low levels of naturally occurring nitrogen in groundwater. We
   have lots of areas high in nitrates. We don’t meet these standards at the GA-FL line for
   water coming into FL. Phosphorus isn’t an issue with us but nitrogen is. Nitrogen levels in
   some of our springs have ramped up from 0.5 mg/L to 6 mg/L over the last 30 years.
   CM: Regarding Dr. Kennedy’s assessment of sustainable yield in the Upper Floridan
   aquifer, I sense some tension there. We based our gap analysis on this.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 12
   SRWMD: We’re not here to influence your decisions. Dr. Kennedy used a 30-foot drop
   and 40% reduction in baseflow as sustainable yield parameters. Based on pressures in our
   springs we don’t think these limits are sustainable. I caution you on using this science.
   Municipalities can use reuse. Send wastewater from municipalities to Ag users. Be
   cautious. If you can’t sustain development with your water resources, don’t continue
   development.
   CM: If you had to do this over again, could you make your protection dollar go further
   with a conservation easement approach versus fee simple approach?
   SRWMD: Yes.
   CM: Can you go back and take fee simple land and make a conservation easement?
   SRWMD: Yes, we are starting to do this now.
   We need to tax bottled water going out. It’s classified as a food source and there is
   currently no tax on food source. When we issue permits, uses can’t harm springs. We have
   2.6 MGD allocated to bottling plants (this is not actual pumping, it’s an allocation).
   CM: Do you issue permits for bottling plants?
   SRWMD: Yes.
   CM: In Brooks County, a hauling outfit got permission to build a bottling plant without
   trucking.
   SRWMD: The Water Management Districts have exclusive permitting authority for water.
   CM: There are other locations in the US where states are charging royalties on bottled
   water.
   SRWMD: We have a policy that we won’t allow trucking of water.
   EPD: Do Ag permits have a term limit?
   SRWMD: Yes. They are based on quantity based on 2-year and 10-year drought analysis
   of crop needs.
   EPD: Have you had a situation where someone bought lots of land and applied for a large
   Ag irrigation permit and you do the evaluation and determine the amount they’re
   requesting is not available and you had to deny it? Do you have the ability to deny the
   user what they ask for?
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 13
   SRWMD: Yes. Normally what will happen is the user will tell us what crop they want to
   grow, such as corn, which is the highest water-using crop. Then we do the analysis to
   determine what amount is needed.
   EPD: Regarding a potential lawsuit with EPA over nutrient standards, if you have a suit
   and a stay is not issued and you issue Ag permits prior to any stay being issued, do you
   have to put those standards on your Ag permits prior to getting a stay?
   SRWMD: We have a call tomorrow at the Governor’s office to discuss this… we don’t
   know what’s going to happen. Florida is probably not going to take the position that
   we’re exempt. If Ag is part of the problem, it’s going to have to be part of the solution.
   WMDs really only do water quantity. Department of Environmental Protection issues
   permits for water quality for operations such as waste management and fertilizer
   application.
   CM: How are you funded?
   SRWMD: 10% from ad velorum tax. The rest comes from grants and loans from the State
   of Florida and the Federal government. The other 3 districts get the majority of their
   funding from ad velorum tax. We had a $55M budget last year. We are the poorest
   district.
   EPD: EPD’s budget this year is $14M.
   CM: At the mouth of the Suwannee, are you getting pushback from the oyster, crab, and
   shrimp industry?
   SRWMD: We monitor flow in the Suwannee to make sure we don’t move the salinity line.
   We haven’t seen decreases in submerged aquatic vegetation or decreased flows that cause
   problems.
   CM: How do you maintain minimum flows?
   SRWMD: Permitting.
   CM: Do you give grants to help people maintain compliance?
   SRWMD: If the State gives us money there are strings attached to it and it’s already
   allocated to certain uses (property acquisition, management, etc.). Federal money is all
   FEMA money for floodplain mapping. Only ad velorum funding has no strings attached.
   Once we spend down our current land purchasing funding I don’t think we’ll be buying
   any more land.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 14
   CM: This is lessons learned.
   SRWMD: Funding comes from land transfer tax from every time land is purchased in
   State. The Legislature divides this funding out to WMDs.
   CM: We tried this in Georgia, but business people, farmers, etc… not everyone bought
   into how they wanted the money used.
   SRWMD: People don’t value water as a resource until they turn on the faucet and nothing
   comes out.
   CM: We’re dealing with the problem of how do you take all this complex information and
   create something that EPD will approve that doesn’t hurt people in the region.
   CM: What is the makeup of your board as far as occupations?
   SRWMD: Cattleman, optometrist, Attorney, CPA, forestry land manager, clam farmer,
   engineer, banker.
   Council thanked the District for coming and providing an informative presentation.
6) Additional Outreach Needs
   The PC handed out a table indicating entities that have been preliminarily targeted for
   additional outreach, including major municipalities and water providers in the region.
   The PC asked Council to review the list and indicate anyone else to whom we should
   perform additional outreach. The PC also noted it will be important to identify
   implementation considerations for those entities that will be involved/effected by
   Council’s recommended Management Practices. Council noted it is also important that we
   do not have our recommendations “put a target” on anyone.
7) Selection of Draft Management Practices
   The Council returned to the discussion of Management Practices where they left off in the
   morning session.
   CM: Regarding surface water impoundments relating to Ag irrigation, I still have
   difficulty understanding how surface water farm ponds maybe contributing to surface
   water gaps. When we start irrigating in April, ponds are full, rivers are at low flow
   condition, and there is not much rain. Impoundments are on upstream reaches: what
   matters is the flow that the dams prevent from going down that reach. It does not matter
   how much water from that pond you use to irrigate. The Council member provided a
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 15
   schematic of the flows into and out of farm ponds and discussed conceptual ideas about
   how to better quantify the effects of farm ponds.
   PC: Yes you are correct that the hydrology has changed. Unless the ponds are at capacity
   they intercept water that would otherwise make it to the stream and then the river. So yes
   the resource assessments show that low flow periods have been affected. The question for
   Council is that knowing that we may be at or exceeding the resource capacity what should
   be done about it? Should future surface water withdrawal permits be affected by this fact?
   Should we recommend EPD continue to issue surface water permits when we know we
   have very low flow conditions that may not always sustain our rivers? What should we
   consider for existing surface water uses?
   CM: I’m concerned that we’re making decisions to use more groundwater and the
   Suwannee River WMD comes and tells us they don’t have enough groundwater.
   Jacksonville is talking about taking more water out of St. Mary’s River.
   PC: Using more groundwater is one option but can we discuss the Council’s
   recommendations for future surface water withdrawal permits?
   CM: We can’t talk about that exclusively.
   CM: This is an unlikely scenario. Everyone knows rivers are going to go down and you
   can’t pump out of a dry stream. Another question is what if an applicant wants to build a
   pond and fill it from surface water when there is not a low flow condition?
   EPD: You could recommend they fill the pond from groundwater. Right now we’re close
   to 50/50 surface water/groundwater sources to fill ponds in our region.
   PC: Also due to Gulf Trough some folks can’t get groundwater. Dr. Hook actually used
   source of supply water data for the Ag forecast.
   The Chairman suggested the representative from the Management Practices
   Subcommittee walk Council through the Management Practice list and get Council’s
   opinion (good or bad) on each practice. Subcommittee Member Gordon Rogers led
   Council in a discussion of each practice. Council discussed edits and modifications to
   several of the practices listed in the preliminary table handout and requested that the
   work be refined by the subcommittee in preparation for CM 9. Major points of discussion
   are highlighted below.
   Groundwater:
       •   Continue to drill wells and use water from the Upper Floridan and other
           prioritized aquifers.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 16
       •  Incentivize land use practices that protect recharge areas of Upper Floridan,
          recognizing some recharge areas are outside the Suwannee-Satilla Region. By
          incentivize Council means tax breaks, conservation easements, fee simple
          transactions, a whole toolbox to prevent pavement.
       •  Gather additional data on aquifer sustainable yield metrics.
   Surface Water Quantity:
       •  Confirm the frequency, duration, severity, and drivers of surface water gaps; and
          identify significant causes of more frequent low-flow conditions in these surface
          water systems (i.e., climate, changing hydrology, etc.).
       •  Additional study is needed to characterize the role of ponds and dams on
          upstream reaches and the effect of changing hydrology on surface waters in the
          region.
       •  Develop additional information on agricultural consumptive use estimates.
       •  Management practices should be voluntary. That is, they should be encouraged
          and incentivized but not mandated.
       •  Return flow management can be used to help restore flows to surface waters. This
          includes modifying discharge locations of some wastewater treatment plants and
          converting land application systems to point source discharges. This could also
          involve stormwater management and consideration of aquifer storage and
          recovery (ASR) if deemed feasible and appropriate.
       •  Inter-basin transfer may be a feasible option at two locations in the region.
   Surface Water Quality:
       •  Provide incentives to preserve hydrologic function of existing wetlands.
       •  Maintain streamside management zones and buffers.
       •  Support Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission and Georgia Forestry
          Commission BMPs and education programs.
       •  For urban areas consider model ordinances and resources such as the Coastal
          Stormwater Supplement to the Georgia Stormwater Manual.
       •  Additional water quality monitoring and data collection.
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 17
8) Water Plan Development
    The PC provided a review of the status of the Plan drafting and review. The final draft of
    the Plan is due to EPD on January 31, 2011.
9) Local Elected Official Comments
    There were no local elected official comments.
10) Public Comments
    Lisa Tomlin, Provost of Wiregrass Technical College: We hope you enjoyed good
    hospitality here and we were honored to have you here. We’re happy to extend an
    invitation for a campus tour to anyone that’s interested. As a gift please take a reusable
    water bottle from us. Ms Tomlin providing some gift bags to the Council in appreciation
    of their visit to the College.
    Al Browning: From attending the meeting in Waycross and this one, I know you have a
    hard task. Water quality needs to be in the Plans. Public education is one of the most
    important aspects of a water program. There are inexpensive ways to implement water
    quantity and quality education.
11) Wrap-up and What to Expect Next Meeting
    The Council agreed to hold the next meeting in Douglas on December 8th, 2010. The
    Chairman suggested holding CM10 in Adel. The PC explained that the purpose of the
    next Council meeting is to finalize Council’s selection of Management Practices. The
    meeting was adjourned.
cc: Cliff Lewis, EPD
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 18
Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Council
Council Members Attendance List
      Suwannee-Satilla Council
                                     10/27/2010
             Members
    1    Joseph L. Boyett
    2    Earl Brice                      X
    3    William L. Brim
    4    Hanson R. Carter                X
    5    Carroll H. Coarsey              X
    6    Ben Copeland                    X
    7    Scott Downing                   X
    8    Eugene Dyal
    9    Darvin Eason                    X
   10    Michael E. Edgy                 X
   11    Greg C. Evans                   X
   12    Greg Goggans
   13    Jim Hedges
   14    Alva Joseph Hopkins             X
   15    Donald A. Johnson
   16    John Wesley Langdale            X
   17    Joe Lewis
   18    R.R. Rusty McCall
   19    Donald H. McCallum              X
   20    Dan Raines                      X
   21    Scotty Raines                   X
   22    S. Gordon Rogers                X
   23    Jay Shaw
   24    Frank G. Sisk
   25    Andy Stone
   26    Grady M. Thompson               X
   27    Doyle Weltzbarker               X
   28    James R. Willis                 X
   29    Jackie Wilson                   X
                             Totals      18
 Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 8 Summary
11/12/10
Page 19
Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Council
Public Attendance List
          Public Attendee           10/27/2010                   Representing
   1      Rich Batten                   X      South Georgia Regional Commission
   2      Al Browning                   X      Browning Environmental
   3      Luke Crosson                  X      GSWCC
   4      John Dinges                   X      Suwannee River Water Management District
   5      Russ Dorman                   X      Tifton
   6      Mary Gazaway                  X      GA EPD
   7      Brittney Foster Hull          X      Packaging Corporation of America
   8      Carlos Herd                   X      Suwannee River Water Management District
   9      Dave Hetzel                   X      Tifton
   10     Dale Jenkins                  X      Suwannee River Water Management District
   11     Jeff Lewis                    X      Fitzgerald Utilities
   12     George Martin                 X      GPC
   13     David Mauldin                 X      GA Farm Bureau
   14     Tom Putnam                    X      Langdale Industries
   15     Bryan Snow                    X      GA Forestry Commission
   16     David Still                   X      Suwannee River Water Management District
                            Totals      16
 