                Georgia Department of Natural Resources
                            Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch
                               4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354
                                         Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232
                                                                             FAX: 404/675-6247
                                        September 10, 2010
DRAFT MEMORANDUM
TO:             SUO Council Members
FROM:           Jeff Larson, GA EPD
                Bill Martello, Jacobs
SUBJECT:        Council Meeting #7 Summary
                Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan
Regional Water Planning
Council Meeting 7 Summary
Meeting Date:           September 8, 2010
Location:               The Thomson Depot, Thomson, Georgia
Attendees:              See list
1) Welcome and Council Member Introduction
Ron Cross, Council Chairman, welcomed everyone to the meeting and thanked them for
attending. Council members, EPD staff, planning consultants (PC), partnering agencies, and
other attendees introduced themselves.
Chairman Cross stated that he has been receiving a letter from a variety of environmental
groups asking for his support for Georgia EPD’s Science and Engineering Advisory Panel to do
further research for 7Q10 policy and instream flows.
PC Bill Martello reviewed what 7Q10 means, and the three options GAEPD allows for minimum
instream flow. Chairman Cross wanted the SUO Council to determine if they would support
Georgia EPD’s Science and Engineering Advisory Panel’s recommendations and the need for
further state funding. It was decided that this is beyond the scope of this regional water plan;
however, the SUO Council would, as part of their management practices, encourage state
funding for this additional research to meet SUO Council’s Goal #6.
 Chairman Cross discussed the upcoming Joint Meeting to be held in Macon on October 6,
2010. He requested the committee chairs attend – Bruce Azevedo, Scott McGregor, and Pat
Goran (for Tom Wiedmeier). Both Larry Walker and Don Dye have requested to attend. The
meeting is public and open to all. PC asked SUO Council to decide upon potential topics they
would like to put forward to Georgia EPD for consideration at the Joint Meeting’s panel
discussions – the selected topics are:
     •  2050 water supply needs
     •  Interstate coordination
     •  Interbasin transfer issues
     •  Agricultural surface water gap on the Ogeechee
Chairman Cross pointed out that there is an upcoming Savannah River Basin Advisory Council
meeting to be held in South Carolina on September 22, 2010 at the Anderson County Library
located in Anderson, South Carolina at 1:00 p.m.
Chairman Cross stated his desire for the development of a Savannah River Basin Coalition. He
is planning on contacting all bordering governments in South Carolina and Georgia to form a
permanent group. His thoughts were that the group would begin as a public sector entity with
county commission chairs and mayors. They would then decide if they wanted to add other
potential stakeholders.
Lastly, the council discussed if they wanted to maintain their goal that restricts interbasin
transfers. Chairman Cross recommended no interbasin transfers out of the Savannah River
that supports economic growth for communities outside that river basin especially to the
detriment of communities surrounding the Savannah River. The existing water should be used
to continue to meet the future basin needs. It was pointed out that existing interbasin transfers
already exist with those near Greenville, South Carolina, from Lake Keowee (owned by Duke
Power); and the proposed biomass electric generating plant in Warren County (in the Upper
Oconee River Basin) plans to use reclaimed water from the City of Thomson for cooling
purposes.
Chairman Cross talked about how we could discourage interbasin transfers from the Savannah
River. Sam Booker discussed the new South Carolina legislation that would limit Greenville’s
withdrawal to projected needs and possibly eliminate the current grandfathered permit amount.
Toye Hill suggested that we limit each user to a maximum usage.
PC Bill Martello discussed the meeting agenda and objectives.
2) Committee Review & Updates
Bill Martello reviewed the status for each committee.
The Technical Committee has met twice to discuss resource assessments and management
practices. The Plan Review Committee has met three times to discuss the plan sections and to
review comments. The Interstate Coordination Committee has met once, and there is an
upcoming meeting on September 22, 2010 with SCDHEC. Scott MacGregor updated the SUO
 Council on the following items: the new South Carolina permitting process and its
implementation phase along with the Savannah Harbor TMDL process. The CSRA and the
Savannah Harbor Committee has selected a facilitator to mediate a mutually agreeable TMDL
implementation plan.
3) Forecast and Resource Assessments Update
Bill Martello reviewed two flow charts – one for water supply and one for wastewater
management to help the SUO Council understand terminology used in the document versus
what is located within their withdrawal and discharge permits.
Municipal water forecast numbers were presented that identify approximately a fifty percent
increase between current usage and projected 2050 needs. Industrial water needs show a 14
percent increase. Agricultural water use was forecast based on crop type and acreage
estimates. Bill Martello explained that the University of Georgia has not developed future needs
for non-irrigated acres and that these have been held constant for this plan. Energy needs are
forecasted to double with the doubling of Plant Vogtle’s capacity. This value could change once
further details are known about the units, but using this assumption is considered conservative.
Surface water summary forecasts were presented and show about a fifty percent increase.
SUO Council members were concerned with the South Carolina summaries and Jeff Larson
stated that SCDHEC will provide updated forecasts as they become available.
Wastewater forecasts identify a sixteen percent increase in discharges.
Surface Water gaps were presented on a node-by-node basis. For the Savannah River, there
are no surface water supply gaps. However, there is a 20-MGD gap at the Eden node as it falls
below the desired flow regime (7Q10) about four percent of the time. The Eden node was
further discussed as the majority of usage at this node is seasonal and agricultural.
The nodes associated with the USACE lakes (Hartwell and Augusta) were discussed regarding
potential impacts from an interbasin transfer. Bill Martello stated that the more critical issue
would be the conservation pool levels and the minimum release flows required by USACE for
downstream users. Chairman Cross asked whether it would be possible for Georgia EPD to run
various scenarios to see how interbasin transfers or changes to minimum flow release would
affect lake levels and water quality for downstream users. Chairman Cross stated that lake
levels affect the surrounding communities’ economy. Clemson University’s Strom Thurmond
Institute has recently completed a study regarding this issue. Chairman Cross would like to
invite them to speak to the SUO Council. He also stated that the SUO Council needs to develop
language supportive of their position on lake levels and minimum release flows.
The Little TN node, Rabun County, shows no gaps.
Toye Hill stated that the USACE is already running optimization studies. Charlie Newton and
Tim McGill suggested that the SUO Council add into their management practices another
recommendation for federal funding to support further optimization studies for the USACE lakes
model and minimum release flows.
 4) Guest Speaker from Georgia Forestry Commission
Bill Martello introduced our guest speaker, John Colberg, from Georgia Forestry Commission. A
copy of his presentation, Georgia’s Forestry Water Quality Program will be included with the
meeting summary.
Question (Robert Jenkins): What is the typical width of the streamside management zone
(SMZ)?
Answer: John stated that they are typically 40 feet but it depends on whether the stream is
perennial or intermittent and the slope of the buffer. The Savannah River is a protected corridor
with a minimum 100-foot buffer; however, forestry activities are exempt provided best
management practices (BMPs) are met. These would have a typical 40-foot SMZ.
5) Forecast and Resource Assessments Update (continued)
After the break, there was further discussion regarding the surface water usage for the
Savannah River. Chairman Cross discussed that USACE needs to re-write recreation use into
their approved uses. It was pointed out that the actual withdrawal flows (140 MGD) are very
small when compared to the minimum release rate (3,600 cfs/2.3 BGD). Toye Hill explained
that the USACE has been studying changing the trigger points for changing their minimum
release flow rates. They currently change from 5,400 cfs to 3,600 cfs. He asked why not
considering an interim step down to 4,200 cfs. (Current USACE operating schedule/
management plan/minimum release varies from 4,200 cfs at Level 1 down to 3,600 cfs
at Level 4.)
Question (Chairman Cross): Does the USACE need congressional action to change their
trigger points?
Answer (Toye Hill): No, they can modify this on their own. They even looked at going as low
as 3,100 cfs in the winter months where the water is colder and has a higher dissolved oxygen
level. There were no water quality impacts.
Comment (Ed Betross): That number may have been skewed due to excessive rainfall.
It was decided that there is a lot of political pressure for the USACE to reconsider their minimum
release flow rates. The year 1986 is being held as the worst drought in history for the USACE
lakes. Release rates at that time were whatever came into the lake was released.
Question (Pat Goran): Do we need to make a recommendation that USACE consider different
trigger points to manage the lakes to include recreation?
Answer (Toye Hill): Yes, but we should also look at additional reservoir capacity above full
pool.
It was decided that the SUO Council should request USACE to review what full pool should be
on the lakes as part of the SUO Council’s management practices.
 Bill Martello presented the groundwater summary for the region. While the Upper Floridan
shows sufficient yield for the future, and the Cretaceous aquifer is undergoing further study, the
communities utilizing the Crystalline aquifer may want to look at other surface water options for
their future needs.
Assimilative capacity was discussed, and is more straightforward. For those communities with
red line streams, more stringent treatment limits will be required to meet some current, but
mostly, future water quality needs. It was noted that these are screening-level water quality
models and more detailed analysis will be required for specific TMDLs.
6) Management Practices
Bill Martello discussed demand management practices emphasizing water conservation as
maximizing the efficiency of water use. He described the four tiers of conservation practices
and the recently adopted Water Stewardship Act.
There was much discussion on the submetering requirements and whether that would be
onerous to existing property owners. Bruce Azevedo said that he recently installed a
submetering system. Others thought that the tenants would not change their water use habits.
Bill Martello identified several other demand management practices with some as “no-regrets”.
This led to a discussion regarding conservation rates. Many communities believe that to be an
issue for them. Chairman Cross assigned preliminary review of these practices to the Technical
Committee.
Question (Chris McCorkle): Why don’t we require landscaper “irrigation design and installation”
certification?
Answer: Bill stated that these were a preliminary list and that they could be modified to what
the SUO Council would like to adopt.
Bill Martello identified several supply management practice options for the Eden node as its
shortfall occurs in the summer during low flows and high use. Drilling additional deep irrigation
wells was discussed; however, the SUO Council asked if Georgia EPD and University of
Georgia confirm what is appropriate for 2050 irrigated acreage? They thought this would be
important prior to making a decision on expensive wells. Chairman Cross feels that there are
additional needs for evaluation and modeling.
The other question asked was how much of the 20 MGD shortfall is because of the Coastal
Council communities?
Other supply management options include reservoirs.
Question (Robert Jenkins): How much will Georgia EPD assist in development of new surface
water reservoirs?
Answer: Bill Martello stated that much of the implementation issues in new reservoirs come
during property acquisition and COE permitting, not in the EPD permitting process.
 Chairman Cross suggested that the SUO Council request as part of their management practices
that Georgia EPD streamline the permitting process and USACE work to optimize the existing
reservoirs storage.
Bill Martello identified water quality management practices as two kinds – stormwater
management – managing your land appropriately and decreasing your impervious surfaces, and
enhanced treatment – providing something greater than secondary.
7) Draft Regional Water Plan
Bill Martello led the group in what has been completed to date and the remaining pieces to
complete. The SUO Council requested to see the Draft Plan that was submitted to Georgia
EPD in August. A copy will be sent to SUO Council this week. The completion schedule is
tight. SUO Council members were concerned that there is much to complete before the next
plan submittal in October. Jeff Larson stated that there is no flexibility in the schedule; however,
it will be draft and blanks will be allowed for data that is still in development.
Several interim meeting dates were scheduled:
     •   Week of 9/20 or 9/27 – SUO and Coastal council chairs to meet
     •   9/21 – Technical Committee Meeting
     •   9/30, 10:00-12:00 – Plan Review Committee Meeting
     •   10/7, 10:00-12:00 – Plan Review Committee Meeting
     •   10/12, 9:00-12:00 – Interim Council Meeting, Thomson Train Depot
8) Elected Official and Public Comments
Chairman Cross asked if there were any final comments, and there were none.
9) Meeting Wrap-up
Chairman Cross thanked the council members for attending the meeting.
Meeting was adjourned by 3:00 p.m.
10) Action Items
      • PC to email Draft Plan Section 1-5 to Council
      • PC to provide location for September 22, 2010 SRBAC meeting
      • PC to include the following items in draft plan as future evaluation and management
          practices:
         o Encourage state funding for additional 7Q10 and instream flows research to meet
             SUO Council’s Goal #6
         o Recommend the need for federal funding to support further optimization studies for
             the USACE lakes model and minimum release flows including full pool elevation
             modifications (Comprehensive Plan II)
         o Request Georgia EPD assistance in streamling the reservoir permitting process
 CM#7 Meeting Attendees
Council Members in attendance     Partnering Agencies in attendance
Ron Cross, Chair                  John Colberg, Georgia Forestry Commission
Bruce Azevedo                     Ed Bettross, Georgia DNR, Water Resources Division
Charles Cawthon                   John Huffmaster, Georgia Farm Bureau
Don Dye                           Deatre Denion, Department of Community Affairs
Dan Fowler (Alternate)            Nancy Bobbitt, US Senator Isakson
Patricia Goodwin (Alternate)      Frank Redmond, US Senator Isakson
Pat Goran (Alternate)
Toye Hill                         General Public in attendance
Robert Jenkins                    Doug Fulle, Oglethorpe Power Corporation
Tom Jordan                        Frank Carl, Savannah River Keeper
Scott MacGregor                   Sam Booker, Georgia Soil & Water Commission
Chris McCorkle                    Alan Saxon, Augusta-Richmond County Utility
Tim McGill                        Michael Rorick, Member of the Public
Charlie Newton
Stan Sheppard
Tom Wiedmeier
Tenia Workman
Council Members not in attendance
Braye Boardman
Jerry Boling
Deke Copenhaver
Barry Cronic
Mike Eskew
Larry Guest
Ralph Hudgens (Ex-Officio)
Eddie Madden
James H. Newsome
Lewis Sanders
Larry Walker
Lee Webster
Tom McCall (Ex-Officio)
Staff in attendance
Jeff Larson, EPD
Brian Baker, EPD
Bill Martello, Jacobs
Diana Jackson, Jacobs
 