                                                                      B&V Project 164139
                                                                            B&V File C-1.4
                                                                       September 29, 2010
To:             Upper Flint Water Planning Council
From:           Kristin Rowles, Black & Veatch and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch
cc:             Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD
Subject:        Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 7 on September 24, 2010
The council meeting was held on September 24, 2010, at the Rock Ranch in The Rock,
Georgia. The list of attendees is attached. In addition to these minutes, the presentations
(slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Upper Flint web portal
(http://www.upperflint.org/). The public sign-in sheet is included as an attachment.
Welcome, Introductions, and Chairman’s Discussion
Council Chair Donald Chase welcomed members and thanked everyone for attending. He
provided an invocation to start the meeting. Next Chairman Chase reminded the group of
the importance of keeping the council’s vision and goals front and center in their minds
as they proceed with their work.
Mayor Hayes Arnold (Thomaston) thanked everyone for attending. Adam Pugh of the
Rock Ranch welcomed everyone, described the Rock Ranch, and showed a brief video
about the ranch and its programs (www.therockranch.com).
Overview of GEFA Low-Interest Loan Programs
Chairman Chase welcomed local elected officials in attendance and gave the floor to
Kevin Kelly of the Georgia Environmental Finance Authority (GEFA) to discuss state-
and federally-funded grant programs administered by GEFA. This presentation was an
additional to the meeting agenda. It was added by the Chairman because of the
importance of funding issues to plan implementation. Two handouts were provided by
Mr. Kelly (attached to the end of these meeting minutes). The handouts included the
following information:
    •   Descriptions of four water infrastructure revolving loan programs and their
        estimated FY2011 available funding and interest rates, summary chart of
        historical loan execution, and GEFA loan statistics; and
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                        Page 2
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                       B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                         September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
    •   A comprehensive table of Georgia water and wastewater funding sources (both
        GEFA and non-GEFA administered programs), their purpose/applicability,
        website, and contact information.
Mr. Kelly started by recognizing that regional councils would be tasked with determining
and selecting management practices that represent financial obligations on the part of
local utilities and authorities and the information provided would help identify existing
programs which should be considered to overcome financial obstacles. Key points made
by Mr. Kelly are summarized below:
    •   GEFA administers four loan programs for water infrastructure development:
        Georgia Fund (state funds), Georgia Reservoir and Water Supply Fund (state
        fund), Clean Water State Revolving Fund (federal fund), and the Drinking Water
        State Revolving Fund (federal fund)
    •   In general, state funds are more flexible than federal funds in terms of the types of
        projects funded.
    •   State fund interest rates are tied to the state’s credit rating.
Cliff Arnett stated that small communities are financially challenged in their ability to
participate in loan programs and that GEFA should consider lower interest rates and/or
loan forgiveness for those systems. Kevin Kelly explained that GEFA administers a
Disadvantaged Community Program under the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund.
This program has a low rates provision contingent upon the applicant meeting certain
requirements. Some principal forgiveness was granted under the program with funds
from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA); however, all of that
funding has since been obligated. Kevin Kelly speculated that government assistance
might be obtained to provide additional grant forgiveness in the future.
Terrell Hudson asked if GEFA had recently sold loans to raise money for the state
general fund. Kevin Kelly responded in the affirmative and said that GEFA will remit
back approximately $288 million through the loan asset sales. Dick Morrow asked and
Kevin Kelly confirmed that this money will not go back to fund GEFAs state funded loan
programs.
Jim Reid asked if individuals are eligible for 319 grants. Tim Cash said no. These grants
go to local governments and non-profits.
Dick Morrow asked if funding is available through GEFA for stream buffer acquisition
and stressed that this would be an important management practice. Kevin Kelly stated
that he did not know the answer to that question but would look into it further. Mr. Kelly
did explain that in the past, land conservation projects have been funded using the Clean
Water State Revolving Fund where they have shown a direct impact on improvement of
water quality. He will check into the applicability of funding stream buffers.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                      Page 3
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                    B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                      September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Next, Chairman Chase asked if anyone had any changes to summary for the last council
meeting (in pre-meeting packet). There were no changes, and with no objections, the
meeting summary was approved by consensus.
Chairman Chase next discussed the September 3rd joint meeting held in Griffin with
Council leaders from the Middle Chattahoochee, Upper Flint, and Lower Flint-
Ochlockonee Councils. Chairman Chase said discussion at the meeting focused on
several topics, including:
     •   Minimum flow requirements established by the US Army Corps of Engineers
         below Woodruff Dam under the Revised Interim Operations Plan (RIOP),
     •   Need for more storage in the ACF Basin, and
     •   Implementation financing sources and structures.
Chairman Chase questioned how a reservoir might be financed and managed and
mentioned the possibility of establishment of a water management authority. Chairman
Chase urged the council members to consider this further and turned the discussion over
to Dick Morrow who was also at the joint meeting. Dick Morrow stated that the
teamwork thus far by the leadership of the three councils has been very positive. Mr.
Morrow reiterated the concept of financing regional infrastructure projects through the
establishment of a watershed authority or authorities. He stated that a revenue stream
would be needed and suggested surcharge on utility bills throughout the region as one
possible solution. Mr. Morrow also said that Richard Royal, chairman of the Lower Flint
Ochlockonee Council, is pushing to extend the final adoption of the regional Water
Development and Conservation Plans (WDCPs) beyond the current deadline of June 30,
2011.
Chairman Chase said that GAEPD Director Allen Barnes had toured his farm as a part of
larger agricultural tour. Chase also reported on a meeting hosted by the Senate and House
agricultural committee chairs was held in Macon on September 16th. Several Council
members were there. Lamar Perlis reported on the meeting. He said that GAEPD
Director Allen Barnes had addressed the meeting and noted that he is bound by the law.
He also commented that models are not perfect. Perlis said that Barnes was asked for
more time for the planning process at the meeting. Jack Holbrook also commented on the
September 16th meeting. He said that GAEPD Director Barnes is aware of the Council’s
activities and recognizes that additional reservoir storage may be needed.
Chairman Chase said that at the September 16th meeting, a letter from the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service was referred to. The letter states that the USFWS believes that the Flint
is already overallocated. Chairman Chase noted his concern about this issue and plans to
look into it further.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                     Page 4
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                     B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                       September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Chairman Chase stated that the plans the Council submits will be met with resistance
from the Georgia legislature. Chase said that there were several legislators at the
September 16th meeting. Chase said that the Council’s work is being watched by
lawmakers and will be given scrutiny by the Legislature, and he believes this is good.
Chairman Chase emphasized that interregional coordination needs to continue. Kristin
Rowles distributed information on a joint water council scheduled for October 6, 2010 in
Macon. The meeting will include panel discussions on shared resource issues. She passed
around a sign-up sheet for the meeting.
Donald Chase asked the Council members to look at the current schedule of milestones
for the Water Development and Conservation Plan process, including as page 2 of the
pre-meeting packet. Chairman Chase reserved his opinion and asked if anybody felt that
the Council needed to ask the legislature to provide additional time beyond the current
June 30, 2011 approval date. Dick Morrow said he thought the Council needed three
more months. Cliff Arnett thought that more time was not needed. He said we do not
gain anything by dragging the process out, and the process is designed to continue and be
adaptive in future iterations. Dick Morrow said that Richard Royal (Lower Flint
Ochlockonee) is concerned that the Legislature will act on the plans we give them, and if
the plans are not as good as the could be, the Legislature will be acting on poor
information. Donald Chase noted that the Council might not gain much by waiting and
that no plan will be bullet proof.
Dick Morrow said that the Middle Chattahoochee Council has requested an extension of
a year because they would like to wait for the planned update of the Chattahoochee River
water control manual by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Kristin said that this
document was not due to be complete until mid-2012.
Chairman Chase noted that the Middle Chattahooche Council is interested in influencing
the revisions to the water control manual, and he hopes that the Middle Chattahoochee
Council will keep the Upper Flint Council informed on this issue. He said that if they
have a specific proposal, the Council will consider it.
Lamar Perlis asked how drastic an effect new information could have on the Council’s
plan. Steve Simpson explained that although not all the water quality assessment results
were yet available, the Water Quality Committee had proceeded forward in developing
management practices because enough information is known to begin making progress
on issues we already know exist. While the water quality modeling may identify
locations where we need to stress implementation of the selected practices, the practices
chosen would be generally the same.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 5
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                    B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                       September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Buddy Leger said that the Council should push ahead and finish the plan. Terrell Hudson
said that the schedule provides opportunities for input. Donald Chase said that the
Council would not oppose other Councils that were requesting an extension, but that in
the meantime, the Council would push ahead and try to finish on time. Charles Rucks
said that it was noted at the September 16th meeting that we would not have all the
information that we need, but that we have to make the best decisions we can and move
forward. Cliff Arnett said that we need to get the plan out to the public to gain their
support. Dick Morrow agreed that the Council should press ahead. Raines Jordan asked
about the likelihood of an extension of the process, and Donald said that there was a good
chance. However, he said that in the meantime, the Council should press ahead and make
the timeline work.
Cliff Arnett asked how long the Council members’ terms lasted, and Steve Simpson
replied three years.
Chairman Chase asked if anyone had any changes to the agenda. With no objections, the
agenda was approved by consensus.
WDCP Review Committee – Report (Discussion of Sections 1-5)
Chairman Chase introduced the topic of draft sections 1 through 5 of the WDCP and
stated that it was of the upmost importance for each Council member to read through the
draft document previously distributed by Kristin Rowles. Kristin reviewed the outline of
the document. The draft document was distributed to the plan review committee in
August and revisions were made prior to the August 16, 2010 submittal of draft sections
1-5 to EPD. EPD has since commented on the document. Next steps in the process
include addressing EPD comments, drafting sections 6 through 8, incorporating feedback
received during this council meeting, and holding another plan review committee meeting
prior to the next deliverable date of October 15, 2010.
Dick Morrow stated that some changes have occurred in the reported model results and
that EPD comments were primarily editorial in nature. Mr. Morrow further stated that the
plan review committee significantly reduced the page count of the original document.
Kristin said that the document reflected the information available in August and that the
next draft would reflect some new information. She said that EPD is asking for a
document of about 40 pages in length. Cliff Arnett expressed concern that the page count
constraint puts the plan at risk of missing key information. Dick Morrow agreed. Kristin
recognized this concern and stated that the concern would need to be directed to EPD as
the plan developed.
Kristin Rowles presented a PowerPoint summary of EPDs comments on draft sections 1-
5. Lamar Perlis questioned if the EPD had any technical criticisms of the facts and figures
presented in the draft. Kristin replied that a few comments on substance would be
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                        Page 6
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                       B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                          September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
addressed in the revisions. Kristin pointed to a comment made in Section 5 which stated
that the Council should not necessarily depend on the Metro North Georgia District to
negate the Montezuma gap. She said that this statement refers to the fact that the Metro
North plan shows the gradual decrease in consumptive surface water demand in the
Montezuma node through the planning horizon. The calculated decline in consumptive
use is forecasted to be approximately 8.3 million gallons per day through 2050 for the
Metro North Georgia District. While this decline would have some impact on the gap at
Montezuma, it is anticipated that it would be small.
Cliff Arnett asked: if we cannot rely on the Metro North Georgia District to do their part
in returning flow, then who can we depend on?
Arnett also explained that counties in the Metro North District, such as Gwinnett County,
have worked to minimize interbasin transfers. Chairman Chase stated that 47 million
gallons per day is transferred from the Chattahoochee Basin to the Ocmulgee which
currently has plenty of water.
Lamar Perlis proposed that it may be prudent to list contingency scenarios should returns
from the Metro District be significantly less than forecasted and/or reflect the uncertainty
of the return numbers. Forecasted values are due to be revisited in the five year updates to
the WDCP.
Dick Morrow discussed the fact that increased conversion from septic systems to
centralized treatment is unlikely due to financial constraints, especially in rural counties.
He said this might limit the increase in Metro District returns. Steve Simpson reminded
the Council that the estimated percent septic values determined for each county were held
constant through the planning horizon for all regions except the Metro District.
Lamar Perlis asked what the EPD comment in Section 5 referred to regarding Subarea 4
of the Floridan aquifer. Kristin Rowles responded that this was the region of the Upper
Floridan aquifer in southwest Georgia assessed in the Dougherty Plain model. This
region exhibits high surface water to groundwater interconnectivity. The comment simply
requests that this area be more clearly defined.
Kristin asked that if any Council members (outside of the plan review committee) want to
review the October 15th draft plan after the next set of edits to let her know. Cliff Arnett
asked whether after the October 15th deliverable date for draft sections 1-8 to EPD there
was a process by which edits would be made. Kristin said that changes could be made
throughout the remainder of the planning process, and that many changes were still likely
before the completion of the January draft plan. Chairman Chase asked that the draft
sections 1-5 of the WDCP be approved for posting on the Council website, with the
knowledge that the document is a draft that is still evolving and that this would not be the
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 7
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                     B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                       September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Council’s last opportunity to change its content. With no objections, the draft WDCP was
approved by consensus for posting on the Council website.
Water Quantity Committee Report and Management Practice Selection
Cliff Arnett, Water Quantity Committee Chair, presented the committee report. First, he
thanked the committee members for their efforts. Cliff discussed the process the
committee implemented to generate the recommendations in the “strawman” document
found on pages 32-45 of the pre-meeting packet. The process included review of surface
water availability resource assessment results, which were summarized in Cliff Arnett’s
presentation. He reviewed the results at Montezuma and Bainbridge. He noted that it was
calculated that 162,223 acre-feet of storage would be needed to offset the gap at
Bainbridge.
Raines Jordan asked if this volume corresponded to the future demand scenario. Steve
Simpson confirmed that this volume does correspond to model conditions with future
demands. Mr. Jordan asked what size reservoir this would be. Mr. Arnett stated that the
size of the reservoir would be dependent on the topography of the site as a shallow
reservoir would need a much greater surface area to achieve the target volume. Kristin
noted that the calculated storage needed was an estimate of the useable storage required
to offset the gap and that an actual reservoir would be larger to account for dead pool
storage, evaporation, and other uses. As a point of reference, she said that the calculated
amount for Bainbridge corresponded to a reservoir about half the size of West Point
Lake. She said that the proposed Sprewell Bluff reservoir would have had 730,00 acre-
feet of storage and the proposed Kinchafonee Reservoir would have had 125,000 acre
feet of storage. Cliff Arnett added that off-stream storage was an option and that storage
is a key alternative in addressing the gap.
Cliff Arnett next discussed management practice selection. For water conservation
practices, he referred to the GAEPD guidance on conservation practice tiers. Tier 1 water
conservation practices are those currently in place by statute, and Tier 2 are those which
are expected in forthcoming rule-making. Tier 3 includes basic conservation which could
be implemented but which is not required by law, and Tier 4 includes practices which go
beyond the basic activities and should be used to address identified gaps. The
recommends implementation of Tier 1 and 2 practices, and it supports the
implementation of Tier 3 and 4 practices in the region through incentive programs.
Dick Morrow stated that the state Water Conservation Implementation Plan does not
distinguish between practices that target consumptive versus non-consumptive uses of
water. For example, he noted, the use of low flow fixtures could hinder the ability of the
City of Griffin to return as much flow as possible to the river during dry months. Mr.
Morrow suggested that the Council may want to specify consumptive versus non-
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                                     Page 8
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                                   B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                                     September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
consumptive uses in the discussion of water conservation practices. Cliff Arnett noted the
new fixture requirements were already in the law and out of the Council’s hands.
Next, Mr. Arnett presented the agricultural water conservation recommendations. Raines
Jordan asked if requirements for low flow protection already existed or if the committee
developed those. Kristin noted that low flow requirements already apply to new permits.
Mike Donnelly asked what the efficiency level of new irrigation systems is now. Jim
Reid said that new systems are greater than 80% efficient. Mr. Reid noted that while
many systems had been upgraded to this level of efficiency, those held by holding
companies were not eligible for incentive funding and therefore were generally less
efficient. They will be replaced with more efficient systems over time as the equipment is
replaced. Jim Reid also commented that the high cost of diesel fuel is helping to shift
irrigation toward more efficient equipment. Dick Morrow suggested that if the practice is
self-correcting perhaps the ‘should have’ in the language in the agricultural conservation
benchmarks should be changed to ‘will have’, and this suggestion was accepted.
The Council had no comments on Cliff Arnett’s presentation of recommendations
regarding agricultural irrigation suspension, agricultural withdrawal permitting, and
agricultural metering.
Dick Morrow mentioned that accounts of natural low to no flow conditions have been
observed during historic droughts in the lower Flint River and that the Lower Flint
Council has concerns over what the resource assessment models are illustrating as a gap.
As the Council considered the recommendations for supply and flow augmentation,
Raines Jordan asked whether it is wise to pump groundwater for augmentation if there is
an interconnection between the aquifer and the surface water system. Chairman Chase
said that the availability of groundwater would be site specific. Kristin Rowles said that
the document noted that this option would require more study, especially of impacts on
groundwater. Mr. Arnett said that the practice should not be ruled out and that the text
included phrasing that the management practice be considered if possible and that further
study is warranted. Kristin Rowles read this section of the water quantity strawman
document from the pre-meeting packet (on page 42 of 64). Chairman Chase followed that
Director Barnes and the state expressed interest in the practice of replacing surface water
use with groundwater to best utilize resources and minimize potential instream impacts.
Mr. Perlis suggested making the following change to the document:
         The Council supports the replacement of surface water withdrawals in the region with
         groundwater withdrawals where possible feasible. The Council recognizes that environmental
         and financial factors may limit the implementation of this practice. However, the Council supports
         reducing pressure on in-stream flows through an emphasis on increased use of groundwater in the
         region – for new and existing withdrawals. The Council also recognizes the need and calls for
         further evaluation of the feasibility of this practice and its potential impacts on groundwater
         aquifers in the region.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                         Page 9
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                        B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                          September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Cliff Arnett advanced the discussion to aquifer storage and recovery (ASR) by stating
that despite its limitations, this practice should not be taken off the table. Mr. Arnett
explained that water pumped into the ground for storage would require a high level of
treatment. This practice would require a high degree of capital investment and permitting
challenges.
No comments were made regarding the recommendation to encourage further use of farm
ponds as a management practice.
Cliff Arnett discussed the recommended statements regarding interbasin transfers (IBT)
which read as follows:
    •   The Council does not endorse any specific proposals for an IBT at this time.
    •   However, the Council urges policymakers not to preclude IBT as an option for
        future water management in the region, as needed and following thorough
        scientific evaluation.
Dick Morrow expressed that in meetings he has had with state representatives and
lobbyists, strong anti-interbasin transfer proponents are seeking to have the practice
banned. Mr. Morrow expressed that the Council may want to consider a stronger stance
in support of IBTs as they are an essential management tool and necessary in some cases.
He said they require scientific evaluation. He noted that the City of Griffin is bisected by
the divide between the Flint and Ocmulgee basins, and so, its water system creates an
interbasin transfers. Hays Arnold expressed that the current recommended statement is as
specific as the Council can make it at this point. Chairman Chase recognized that the
recommended statement is watered down but, the Council does not need to take sides.
The region could benefit from an IBT into the region. The Council considered the current
wording of the recommendations:
     The Council does not endorse such a proposal for an IBT at this time.
     However, the Council urges policymakers not to preclude IBT as an option for future
     water management in the region, as needed and following thorough scientific
     evaluation.
Donald Chase suggested that the first sentence be changed to recognize that interbasin
transfers are common, and they are an important management tool. Kristin suggested the
following wording for the 1st sentence:
The Council recognizes that IBT s currently exist in the region and that IBTs will
continue to be a valuable water management tool in the future.
The Council accepted this substitution. The second sentence will remain as written.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                          Page 10
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                        B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                          September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Cliff Arnett discussed the management practice recommendation that new Land
Application Systems (LAS) be used only as an option of last resort. Mr. Arnett pointed
out that retrofitting existing land application facilities to point discharge facilities would
be cost prohibitive and that the existing use of LAS in the region is limited and would
contribute very little flow for instream augmentation.
Cliff Arnett presented the following recommendations regarding storage:
    •   To address the need for storage to augment low flows during dry periods, the
        Council recommends the creation of Study Commission to evaluate storage
        options within the Upper Flint region.
    •   The Commission’s evaluation should assess potential locations, viability, cost,
        and implementation.
Raines Jordan asked if this commission would be at the state level. Cliff Arnett said that
it most likely would. Mr. Jordan asked if a reservoir would apply for specific areas or for
the entire region. Mr. Arnett replied that in the view of the committee the idea is general
and a specific location is not recommended. Terrell Hudson pointed out that it would be
much easier, due to topography and soils, that a reservoir be constructed in the upper part
of the Flint Basin, as opposed to the lower part of the basin.
Dick Morrow returned to the subject of water conservation noting that practices that seek
to conserve non-consumptive water use do not provide much benefit. Discussion
followed. Kristin suggested that the document could be edited to state that the Council
recognizes that conservation applied to consumptive water uses has a greater benefit than
applied to uses which are non-consumptive. Raines Jordan said that he did not think that
the Council should make a statement against conservation.
Dick Morrow explained that the City of Griffin’s withdrawals typically occur in the
wetter months when the non-depletable instream flow requirements allow greater
withdrawal capability. This flow is stored in the City’s off-stem reservoir. In the dry
months, this withdrawal is not possible as often; however, return flows continue to be
discharged (approximately 40% of the City’s total return flows) to the Flint River. If the
users supported by the City’s central sewer system are subjected to increased
conservation measures, the quantity of flow that could be returned to the Flint River
would be reduced. In dry months this would reduce the amount of the stored, used,
treated, and discharged water from returning to the Flint River. He said that Griffin
currently provides 4 MGD of water in flows from its wastewater plant during the summer
and that increased conservation would decrease this amount.
Cliff Arnett stated that the stored water could also be used for augmentation during low
flow periods. Mr. Arnett stated that if we come out against conservation it would be bad.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 11
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                      B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                        September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Chairman Chase added that the Council’s vision and goals encourage conservation and
would be uncomfortable making a statement against it.
Lamar Perlis stated that Dick’s suggestion is something measurable and could be
quantified. Hays Arnold commented that Mr. Morrow is correct and that Thomaston
benefits from Griffin’s contribution to flows, but he did not have a solution in how to
address this without sounding anti-conservation.
Cliff Arnett questioned how the Council would implement a water conservation
management practice that separated consumptive versus non-consumptive water users.
Donald Chase stated that conserved water could be sold later. Dick Morrow replied that
different rates and standards could be applied to customers having septic systems versus
those hooked up to central sewer systems.
Donald Chase noted that the Council did not have a consensus on this issue and
suggested that the issue be tabled and discussed further in committee.
Kristin asked the Council to consider the scope of the water quantity recommendations.
Do they apply to the whole region? Council members confirmed that they do apply to the
whole region and that it would be too difficult to try to apply different practices in
different watersheds within the region.
Next, Kristin reviewed the three wording changes that had been made in the Council’s
discussion of the recommendations (in the agricultural water conservation benchmarks, in
the flow augmentation from groundwater recommendation, and in the interbasin transfer
recommendation). She asked the Council to consider approval of the recommendations
for incorporation into the October 15 draft of the WDCP. Dick Morrow noted his
objection regarding conservation targeted toward non-consumptive water use, but the
Council noted its approval of the recommendations for the October 15th draft, while
noting this objection for further discussion at the next Water Quantity Committee
meeting.
Lunch
During lunch, Jeff Manley from the Rock Ranch told the Council more about the Rock
Ranch and Chick-Fil-A. Hays Arnold told the Council about the City of Thomaston’s
efforts to upgrade its water infrastructure.
Water Quality Committee Report and Management Practice Selection
Raines Jordan, Water Quality Committee Chair, presented the committee report. Mr.
Jordan stated that funding practices and programs to address water quality issues will be a
problem given the economic climate therefore, the committee worked toward
recommendations as opposed to mandates. He further stated that the purpose of this
meeting is to gain feedback from the Council on these recommendations. Steve Simpson
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                     Page 12
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                      B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                        September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
added that additional model results are forthcoming including water quality for lakes and
streams in the ACF Basin. These results are expected to be provided toward the end of
the year, but results are not anticipated to change the recommended practices.
Steve Simpson briefly summarized the implications of USEPA’s proposed nutrient
standards for the waters of Florida. The Clean Water Act calls for states to establish water
quality standards (qualitative or quantitative) based upon designated uses of the water.
Environmental groups sued the state of Florida citing that the standards established were
vague and ineffective. In November 2009, a federal consent decree required EPA to
develop numeric nutrient standards for Florida’s waters. EPA issued a Federal Register
on 1/26/2010 with Water Quality Standards for the State of Florida’s Lakes and Flowing
Waters. Approximately 2,000 public comments were received by EPA with stakeholder
concerns and comments regarding costs, scientific justification, and federal versus state
jurisdiction. These included comments made by Georgia EPD. EPA promulgation of final
criteria for Florida’s lakes and flowing waters is set for October 15, 2010. The standards
as currently proposed would directly affect Georgia because they would require Georgia
EPD to issue more stringent discharge permits in the ACF basin to be able to meet
proposed total nitrogen and total phosphorous limits of 0.824 mg/L and 0.043 mg/L,
respectively, below the Jim Woodruff Lock and Dam.
Cliff Arnett commented that this would tighten discharge standard for point sources while
nonpoint sources would continue to be largely unaddressed by regulation.
Raines Jordan next reviewed the water quality management practice recommendations.
These recommendations are included in the water quality strawman document, which is
included in the pre-meeting packet. Mr. Jordan suggested that the establishment of a
water summit with agencies and stakeholders be organized to further the development of
water quality issues and nonpoint source pollution. He also stated that for nonpoint
source pollution programs a disparity exists in the regulatory implementation between
well funded utilities and smaller utilities. Without enforcement, the programs fail to
adequately protect water quality.
A list of existing best management practices (BMPs) and state programs were reviewed
by the committee to aid in developing the list of recommended management practices.
For example, the Council has reviewed a best management practice manual for water
quality protection in dirt road construction and maintenance. Cliff Arnett asked what the
Council might suggest for dirt roads given that no money is available to fund a program.
Dick Morrow said that implementing dirt road BMPs would represent a monumental
expense for counties. Raines Jordan agreed and stated perhaps with more awareness and
better understanding, future implementation may be more readily adopted and or funded.
Cliff Arnett asked if all of the recommended management practices focused on education
and encouragement or if more substantive recommendations were made. Steve Simpson
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                                   Page 13
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                                B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                                  September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
responded by stating that the committee used language to encourage and educate as
opposed to require due to the lack of foreseeable funding for these programs, but all of
the recommendations offer the potential to improve water quality.
Cliff Arnett stated that a baseline of water quality data needs to be established; without a
baseline, no quantitative analysis exists to determine the status of non-degradation.
Raines Jordan asked what that baseline might be. Mr. Arnett suggested recommending a
watershed study. Dick Morrow expressed that you cannot manage what you cannot
measure. Steve Simpson said that, along these lines, the committee had recommended the
collection of more water quality data. Steve elaborated on what baseline information was
available on water quality, including documentation of impaired stream reaches under the
Clean Water Act 303(d)/305(b) list and corresponding Total Maximum Daily Load
(TMDL) implementation plans. Mr. Arnett replied that TMDL implementation plans are
largely just desktop studies as opposed to hands-on projects. Raines Jordan brought up
the fact that the current water quality modeling being performed for the resource
assessment will provide some estimates of baseline water quality data for nutrients.
Steve Simpson suggested the following change to the near-term water management
practice recommendations:
        Improve water quality monitoring to provide a baseline of data from which informed decisions
        can be made in the future the data for water quality improvements in the future (increased number
        of collection sites, increased monitoring frequency and parameters sampled).
Frank Keller expressed some concern that having these BMP manuals and books and
encouraging use of them in the future would not be an effective strategy for some rural
communities. Dick Morrow recognized the challenge for smaller systems to achieve
enforcement and stated that the City of Griffin now holds its own departments to the
same sedimentation and erosion control standards it holds general contractors, which was
not always the case.
Terrell Hudson pointed to a program implemented in Dooly County where lesser used
dirt roads were abandoned and subsequently reforested, thereby reducing their
contribution of sediment to area waterways. Lamar Perlis questioned if transportation
studies could be performed in other counties to develop a similar closure program. Jack
Holbrook stated some existing funding mechanisms already in place for local
transportation and dirt roads.
Other BMP manuals such as Georgia’s Stormwater Management Manual were discussed.
Dick Morrow stated that cities above a certain size are required to abide by the
requirements in the manual while smaller utilities do not.
A question was raised regarding the meaning of the recommended near term water
quality practice to increase stream buffer quality in the region. Steve Simpson stated that
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                               Page 14
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                             B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                                September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
the current regulations for stream buffers are based upon width as a simplified measure
for regulatory purposes. The quality of the stream buffer is dependent on several factors
including width, slope, and vegetative cover.
Dick Morrow started a discussion on funding management practices by introducing the
idea of a water management district. Such a district could be funded through fees in
billing rates, for example a per gallon surcharge. The funds received could then be used
to finance infrastructure, buffers, and other management practices and programs. Mr.
Morrow pointed to districts which are established in Arizona as an example. Cliff Arnett
expressed that water law and management is drastically different in the west. Mr.
Morrow pointed to water management districts established in the state of Florida as an
example as well.
Mike Donnelly stated that the City of Americus started a stormwater fee to help finance
their ongoing water quality management. Dick Morrow commented that a similar fee is
established in the City of Griffin. Chairman Chase urged the Council that ideas and
concepts on funding mechanisms need more thought. Mr. Morrow replied that he would
rather see the council deal with these issues on their own rather than handing it over to
the state.
The long-term recommended management practice was modified in discussion by the
Council as follows:
        Support increased funding for infrastructure improvements to provide improved more consistent
        water quality.
Raines Jordan stated that as these recommendations are adopted, the committee will
adapt to the forthcoming modeling results and make modifications as necessary.
Chairman Chase asked for approval of the recommendations in the water quality
strawman for incorporation into the October 15th draft. The draft recommendations were
approved for use in the October 15th draft by consensus.
Clean Water Act 319(h) Grant Opportunities
Steve Simpson led a brief discussion regarding competitive grant opportunities for
available for nonpoint source control project from EPD through Federal funding. Steve
explained that a formal application process is in place. Detailed information on the
program is provided on page 56 of 64 of the pre-meeting packet.
Cliff Arnett asked the applicants would be responsible for paying the remainder of the
60/40 cost share split associated with the program, which was answered in the
affirmative.
Groundwater Sustainable Yields Update
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                       Page 15
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                       B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                         September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Kristin Rowles updated the Council on revised groundwater use numbers presented and
compared with the modeled sustainable yields of selected aquifers. A set of charts
summarizing the results is included in the pre-meeting packet.
Kristin reviewed the metrics used in the groundwater assessment models and reviewed
the results and use comparisons.
In the Dougherty Plain, average use numbers are above the sustainable yield. Dick
Morrow asked if the Upper Floridan aquifer in the Dougherty Plain was out of water.
Kristin Rowles clarified that the metric impacted in the Dougherty Plain model was a
reduction in surface water baseflow. Impacts to aquifer levels were limited; drawdown of
less than 5 feet was observed in the model results. Kristin noted that the results for this
aquifer told a similar story to that indicated by the surface water availability model results
at Bainbridge. Groundwater use impacts on surface water are demonstrated in both the
surface and groundwater availability models.
For the Cretaceous aquifer, Kristin noted that use was at the sustainable yield limit now
and would exceed it during the planning period. She said that the model for this squifer
was going to be recalibrated and the sustainable yield estimates were expected to change.
The sustainable yield is likely to increase. She reminded the Council that the portion of
the Cretaceous aquifer modeled for the assessment went as far west as halfway across
Macon County, and therefore, did not include the whole of the Cretaceous aquifer in the
planning region.
Kristin also reviewed results for the other modeled aquifers, which generally showed use
below or within sustainable yield.
Cliff Arnett asked if the total sustainable yield values account for impacts associated with
saltwater intrusion. This would affect sustainable yield availability in the coastal region.
Kristin was not certain how saltwater intrusion impacts were addressed. The planning
consultants can check into this question.
Conservation
Kristin Rowles distributed and discussed guidance information from EPD regarding
water conservation. Kristin stated that the flow chart provided illustrates a process similar
to what the Council has already used. She suggested that the committee review the
guidance to be sure that they feel that their efforts to evaluate water conservation
practices have been complete enough. For example, the Water Quantity committee might
wish to review the conservation goals in the Water Conservation Implementation Plan
another time. She reminded the Council that the Statewide Water Plan states that
conservation should be a priority management practice in the regional plans.
WDCP Sections 6-8 Development
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                                     Page 16
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                                     B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                                       September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Kristin Rowles discussed the table of contents and items to be included in sections 6
through 8 of the WDCP. The table of contents for the WCDP is included in the pre-
meeting packet. The next steps in the WDCP development process will include
preparation by the planning contractors of sections 6-8 and incorporation of Council and
EPD comments into section 1-5. A plan review committee conference call for sections 1-
8 will be held October 11th or 12th. The entire Council will be e-mailed sections 1-8 by
Thursday, October 7th. If Council members outside of the plan review committee have
comments, they should be sent directly to Kristin Rowles.
Wrap-up and Next Meeting
Chairman Chase commented on comment letters he has received regarding the use of
7Q10 as a metric in the surface water availability assessment. At this time, a scientifically
defensible alternative is not available. Cliff Arnett commented that it would be fine to
analyze other alternatives, but basing low flow requirements on the lowest unimpaired
flow value would be impractical.
Chairman Chase asked that Kristin distribute an interbasin transfer report that he recently
received to the Council members.
Council meeting 8 was schedule for Monday, November 15. The meeting will be held in
Pike County.
Kristin distributed a meeting evaluation form. The Council meeting was adjourned.
 MEETING SUMMARY                                                         Page 17
Upper Flint Water Planning Council                          B&V Project 164139
Council Meeting 7                                            September 29, 2010
Meeting Date: September 24, 2010
Attachment 1:
Upper Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council
Council Meeting Attendance – September 24, 2010
Council Members
Clifford Arnett                            Terrell Hudson
Hays Arnold                                Raines Jordan
Mike Beres                                 Frank Keller
Michael Bowens                             Buddy Leger
Gene Brunson                               Dick Morrow
Donald Chase (Chair)                       Lamar Perlis
Mike Donnelly                              Jim Reid
Harold Fallin                              Charles Rucks
Eddie Freeman                              Bill Sawyer
Jack Holbrook
Council Members Not In Attendance
Greg Barineau                              Lynmore James
Tommy Burnsed                              Brant Keller
William Culpepper                          Gary Powell
Beth English                               Randall Starling
George Hooks                               Joel Wood
Planning Consultants
Mike Friedlander, B&V                      Steve Simpson, B&V
Kristin Rowles, GWPPC                      Mark Masters, GWPPC
Georgia EPD
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief
Bill Morris
Georgia State Agencies
Luke Crosson, Georgia Soil and Water
Bert Earley, Georgia Forestry
Jimmy Evans, Georgia DNR
Renetta Hobson, Georgia DCA
Kevin Kelly, GEFA
Ken Murphee, Georgia Forestry
 