                             Georgia Department of Natural Resources
                                  Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch
                                     4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354
                                                Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232
                                                                                   FAX: 404/675-6247
                                           October 15, 2010
MEMORANDUM
TO:             Council Members
FROM:           Kevin Farrell, GA EPD
                Doug Baughman, CH2MHILL
SUBJECT:        Meeting 8 Summary
                Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan
Regional Water Planning
Council Meeting 8 Summary
Meeting Date: October 13, 2010
Location: Old Capitol Building (Baldwin County)
1) Welcome
Council Coordinator Doug Baughman introduced Chairman Richard Bentley (Mayor of Milledgeville)
who welcomed Council back to the Old Capitol Building for its eighth meeting. Chairman Bentley also
thanked them for their ongoing service.
2) Meeting Overview and Announcements
Baughman then noted the key objectives for the day:
        •   Discuss scoring and endorse final list of management practices
        •   Discuss regional plan enforcement guidance
        •   Discuss and endorse implementation responsibilities and schedule
Next he reviewed the day’s agenda and noted that the Council had a lot to accomplish at this meeting.
3) Review of Instream Flow Needs
Following the meeting overview, Baughman introduced Chris Nelson from the Georgia Department of
Natural Resources (DNR), Wildlife Resources Division to give a brief presentation to Council on
instream flow needs. Council members had requested this information after discussions at previous
                                                                                                   Meeting Summary
                                                                     Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                                   October 13, 2010
meetings. Nelson’s presentation underscored the importance of balancing the needs of humans and biota
in maintaining instream flows. He showed a graph that captured the variations in flows of natural
hydrologic regimes, including:
     •   Subsistence flow – particularly important in the fall for providing minimal water quality
         protection
     •   Base flow – provides sustainable habitat and is typically higher than 7Q10 [a measurement of
         stream flow]
     •   High flow – flushes out silt and sediment
     •   Overbank/flood flows – help shape habitats and recharge the floodplain water table
He noted the 7Q10 (monthly) number is what was used in the surface water availability resource
assessments model and is what EPD typically uses for permitting new surface water withdrawals. Nelson
pointed out to the group that high flows are needed to produce game fishes of desirable sizes and provide
details on the economic impact of fishing and its related activities to Georgia. Nelson explained that there
were three options in existing state policy on minimum instream flows designed to achieve a sustainable
approach to managing instream flows:
     •   Rely on monthly 7Q10 flow
     •   Conduct a site specific instream flow study
     •   Seasonal percentages of mean annual flow
Other recommendations from Nelson’s presentation included increasing water conservation measures,
returning water closer to the intake, using river intakes instead of reservoirs, and identifying high priority
streams for the State Wildlife Action Plan. At this point the floor was opened for discussion from
Council. A motion was made to include a recommendation in the Water Conservation and Development
Plan (WCDP or “the Plan”) that the state review the instream flow requirements over the next 5 years.
Council Comment: I’m concerned about voting when we don’t fully understand the implications.
Council Comment: The motion would reflect the recommendation that the State look at instream flow
policy prior to the next five year update [as it relates to protecting aquatic resources].
Council Comment: I have some concerns with how specific some items are in the presentation.
Council Coordinator: This would just be a general recommendation to the State.
Council Comment: How will this be funded?
Council Coordinator: That’s not certain right now.
Council Comment: The subsistence flows are the controversial part. I would like to see more specificity
to the recommendation. It just seems like we’re kicking the can down the road.
Council Comment: The Council hasn’t seen any other information related to flows other than the 7Q10.
There motion was not seconded but was tabled to the discussion later in the day on recommendations to
the state.
4) Resource Assessment Gaps
Discussion turned to updated results for the resource assessment models of future conditions for water
availability (supply) and water quality. Baughman gave an overview of the modeling conditions used for
the evaluations. He noted the model on surface water availability shows a very small shortfall in the
Penfield node; he then reviewed a few of the management practices that can be used to help avoid or
close the gaps.
                                                                                                  Meeting Summary
                                                                    Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                                  October 13, 2010
Baughman also touched on the water quality modeling results for the future. He pointed out that in the
future, the majority of the nutrient loadings into the lakes will be from point sources because of increased
wastewater volume as a result of population growth. One council member questioned where the future
assumptions came from, asking if land use plans were taken into account.
The discussion shifted to point source [direct discharges] versus non-point source pollution into the
basin’s waterways. Baughman explained that during a wet year non-point source pollution could nearly
double in some instances. However, the dominate source of nutrients in the future would still be point
sources without higher levels of treatment.
Baughman continued the presentation and shared the future chlorophyll-a results for Lake Oconee. While
there are not set standards yet for reservoirs in the basin, the model used a 20 ug/L standard (based on the
metrics for Jackson Lake). The result was that the proposed wastewater treatment plants may have to go
beyond the assumed permit limits to maintain water quality in the future.
Council Comment: Can the model be run with lower limits?
Council Coordinator: Yes.
Council Comment: How expensive is it to go from 5 mg/L to 1 mg/L of total phosphorous?
Council Coordinator: Very expensive.
Baughman provided similar information on impaired streams in the basin; he also asked Council to
review a document showing planned and permitted water and wastewater treatment facilities for accuracy.
The item is for planning purposes.
The discussion moved on to the management practices (MP) to address TMDL parameters (total
maximum daily load) [a measurement of a water body’s assimilative capacity]. Baughman reminded
Council of the MP “strawman” they had received in their pre-meeting materials and reviewed the MPs for
non-point source pollution as they applied to different areas (urban, rural), the level of effort (high or low)
and the percent of land using MPs (50% - 100%). Council members offered their feedback.
Council Comment: Clarke County already has a storm water utility.
Council Comment: MS4 counties already have to meet 80% removal level for total suspended solids.
We should use “high” level of implementation for the five MS4 counties (Barrow, Clarke, Jackson,
Oconee, Walton).
Council Coordinator: We do have to look at this over a 50 year period, so it’s better to go with high.
Council Comment: Some of the dense development areas along the lakes will be required to do more. I
would suggest applying more stringent requirements on the main tributaries leading to the lakes, possibly
developing specific MPs for subwatersheds.
5) Management Practice Scoring Discussion
The next item on the day’s agenda was reviewing the scoring of the MPs. Baughman recognized the
efforts of the scoring committee who met in August after CM 7 and held additional conference calls. On
the committee were:
    •    Hunter Bicknell
    •    Jennifer Davis
    •    Larry Eley
    •    Alan Foster
    •    Pat Graham
    •    Benjie Tarbutton
                                                                                                  Meeting Summary
                                                                    Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                                  October 13, 2010
Baughman presented the scoring of the MPs for each category:
     •    Demand Management
     •    Water Supply
     •    Wastewater
     •    Water Quality
He then shared the top scoring practices that were included on the strawman and went through additional
endorsement from the basin subcommittees.
Baughman asked members of the scoring committees to say a few words about the process and resulting
MPs. Bicknell mentioned that the water supply really came out as a very important component. Foster
commented that there was a lot of complexity involved in the scoring process and he was concerned at
first, but felt good about the results in the end. Council member Andrews noted that a lot of thought went
into the process and overall the results were good.
After a motion and a second the scoring committee’s recommendations were adopted unanimously by
Council.
6) Review & Discussion on Regional Plan Enforcement
The discussion transitioned into how the plan will be enforced. Baughman read a statement from the State
Water Plan to explain EPD’s role:
The Division will implement the integrated water policy through its existing statutory authority for
permitting of water withdrawals and discharge of pollutants under O.C.G.A. §§12-5-31, 12-5-30(a), 12-
5-30(b), 12-5-96 and 12-5-105.
He also highlighted some of the key points from the Regional Water Planning Guidance that is part of the
State Water Plan, specifically:
     •    Once adopted, the EPD Director will use the Water Development and Conservation Plans to
          guide decisions regarding permitting.
     •    These plans will also guide state grants and loans from the Georgia Environmental Finance
          Authority (GEFA) for water-related projects within that region.
     •    Once the regional Water Development and Conservation Plans have been developed and adopted,
          the State and the regions must partner to implement the plans.
     •    The Director will update current compliance inspection and enforcement capabilities and
          recommend enhancements as appropriate to provide consistent implementation of existing laws
          and rules and regulations across the State and among local issuing authorities.
Next Baughman reviewed other enforcement options for Council to consider, such as including “qualified
local government status” via DCA (Department of Community Affairs) and establishing an audit process
similar to the Metro District [North Georgia Metropolitan Water Planning District]. The reference to
DCA generated discussion on its role in the implementation process.
Council Comment: Qualified local government status is usually tied to the “comprehensive” plan, which
also has solid waste, service delivery strategies, etc. This can be an onerous process for smaller
communities.
DCA Comment: We anticipate that the regional water plans will be integrated into the comp plan.
                                                                                                Meeting Summary
                                                                  Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                                October 13, 2010
EPD Comment: This is not specifically stated, but it does appear to be going in that direction.
Council Comment: There are already too many mandates on county and city governments. And the
[Metro] District approach seems too stringent, but you have to put it somewhere.
Council Coordinator: The regional water plan will be one review piece during the permitting process by
EPD, but there does need to be some sort of balance or a bright line.
Council Comment: The recommendations should be included in the comp plan as opposed to a strict
compliance measure. Unless there is some requirement in a comp plan, nothing is going to be
implemented. So there does need to be a bright line at least forcing consideration of the water plan. We
need to set the bar somewhere because we need to protect water resources for future economic
development. And the local governments will end up funding it indirectly anyway.
Council Comment: Who makes the call on compliance? DCA is not a compliance agency even though it
can change the qualified local government status.
Council Comment: Will the judging for compliance be based on all 38 MPs? How will that be spelled
out in the final product for implementation?
Council Comment: The state water planning process seems to be promoting consolidated government
because the smaller communities can’t deal with all of the requirements.
Council Comment: We need it tied in to legislation to ensure funding. Is there interest in a per capita
assessment to fund implementation?
Council Comment: Comp plans are usually pretty general and the requirements aren’t too burdensome.
At this point, Council facilitator Marci Davis explained that during this agenda item, the goal was to get
input from all members by going person to person and giving everyone a chance to speak without
interruption. Some members deferred, but the discussion continued with additional questions and
comments on how the Plan would be enforced.
Council Comment: In some counties, there are several cities and how will we deal with who is
responsible for what?
Council Comment: Rural counties shouldn’t have to suffer [the expense] because by definition, they
shouldn’t have water quality issues or significant development.
Council Comment: How will the Plan be revised if there are some unintended consequences before the
5-year update?
Council Coordinator: That’s a topic we’ll discuss later on the agenda.
Council Comment: There will be a cost to taxpayers and we need to know that to successfully
implement [the Plan].
Council Comment: There has to be some enforcement mechanism to do the right thing.
Council Comment: Should there be some per capita threshold for implementation?
Council Comment: What is the trigger for amending the Plan?
Council Coordinator: There is none currently.
Council Comment: We need to think of an Upper Oconee specific response.
Council Comment: What is the feedback from other Councils? What does the [Metro] District do with
its per capita contributions?
Council Coordinator: The funds are used to maintain support staff and provide revisions to the District
Plan.
Council Comment: It seems that the people who appointed us as council member knew there would be a
cost and that many local governments are already spending money to meet the requirements. My question
is who owns the plan? And will they ultimately have the responsibility to enforce it?
EPD Comment: Our [EPD] task is to provide permits on an individual basis. The permit writers look in
detail at all conditions, and they will pick out recommendations from the Plan that seem most appropriate
to each permit. EPD will likely be the ones using the plans the most.
                                                                                                 Meeting Summary
                                                                   Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                                 October 13, 2010
Council Comment: This is why we need language in the 38 MPs that “encourages” the practices to allow
the flexibility local governments need.
Public Comment: There could be a lot of unintended consequences from mandates and it would be better
to have the practices be recommendations that could be converted to requirements. The Upper Oconee
region is very different from the Metro District – their issue is quantity and ours is quality. We also need
to be careful about touching on the local government status for communities.
Council Comment: I’m concerned about the financial situation and how any upcoming water mandates
could affect budgeting. Transportation is another concern with HB277 [pending state legislation]. As a
member of the GEFA Board and I’ve seen communities who have already been approved for loans turn
them back in because they are nervous about being able to make the payments over 20 years.
7) Implementation Responsibilities
For this portion of the agenda, Council was broken into five working groups to review Section 7 of the
draft Plan, which outlined the parties responsible for implementing the 38 MPs. The responsibilities were
divided into initial actions, short-term actions, and long-term actions. Each group reported out on areas of
concern.
After the exercise, Baughman reviewed Table 7.4 from the draft Plan and asked for comments on “State
Recommendations” for funding, coordination, and the 5-year update.
Council Comment: If we fund the group, we’ll have more control on the implementation and have folks
involved within the basin. This would allow the local funded council to certify and track implementation.
Council Comment: Could we establish an authority that would allow for budgets and funding power?
Council Comment: It would be a problem to get that idea through counties for a self-taxing, self-funded
body.
Council Comment: Regional commission boundaries don’t match council boundaries.
Baughman requested additional information on funding ideas from council members to help fill in Table
7.4.
8) Monitoring and Reporting
Next Baughman gave Council with information on the development of Section 8, which covers
monitoring and reporting of the Plan. The section will address benchmarks, Plan updates, and Plan
amendments. Baughman also provided the group with language from the State Water Plan to expand on
those points, specifically:
     •   ... each Regional Water Plan will be subject to review by the appropriate Regional Water
         Planning Council every five years.
     •   These reviews and updates will allow an opportunity to adapt the Regional Water Plan based on
         changed circumstances and new information arising in the interim five year period.
     •   The benchmarks just discussed will guide EPD in their review of the Regional Water Plan.
Baughman offered some suggestions on approaches and examples Council could use for this phase of the
Plan, including:
     •   Following the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District model
              o Council meets periodically to review implementation status and amendments
              o ARC (Atlanta Regional Commission) staff provide support and complete annual
                  reporting
              o Self-funded
                                                                                                Meeting Summary
                                                                  Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                                October 13, 2010
     •   Using a non-profit in a coordinating role
              o Council recommends NGO or new organization
              o NGO tracks implementation and completes reporting
              o Potential funding through grants
     •   Establish an alternative inter-governmental agreement
              o Council would recommend
              o May include key local governments within basin
              o Could be self funded
Baughman said the group could also come up with its own suggestion or create a combination of the
presented options. He noted that the State Water Plan also offers some flexibility in updates based on
“triggering events” such as changes in state law, Council consensus, and other situations to be
determined. He said the contractors would fill in Table 8.1 and send to Council within two weeks.
At this point, Chairman Bentley asked to revisit the motion to include recommendations on the instream
flow policy that was proposed earlier in the meeting. The motion was seconded and approved by Council
with one vote in opposition.
9) Review Schedule and Next Steps
Near the end of the meeting, Baughman reviewed the upcoming schedule of events and proposed
December 8 as the date for the next council meeting with a location TBD somewhere in the middle of the
basin.
10) Wrap Up/Elected Official and Public Comment
Comments from elected officials and the public were solicited throughout the meeting and then also at the
end. There were no additional comments at the end of the meeting.
Council members completed their meeting evaluations and the group was adjourned.
11) Written Comments Submitted to Council
In accordance with the Council’s request to receive written comments, three were submitted by the end of
the meeting. The comments are recorded as written. Illegible words are noted with a question mark (?).
Additional clarification of acronyms, jargon, etc. is noted by brackets [ ].
Bryan Rogers – County Administrator, Laurens County
Implementation of plans should be done through the Regional Commission or new Regional Organization
but not through EPD or other state agency. Local government would have representation on a regional
commission but if control goes to a state agency then there is no representation. State agency would take
one size fits all strategy.
Meeting Attendees
Council Members Present                                        •   Stuart A. Cofer (alternate)
     • James Andrews                                           •   Melvin Davis
     • Charles S. Armentrout                                   •   Larry Eley
     • Richard Bentley, Chair                                  •   Alan Foster
     • Hunter Bicknell                                         •   Linda Gantt
     • Vincent Ciampa
                                                                                          Meeting Summary
                                                            Upper Oconee Water Planning Council Meeting #8
                                                                                          October 13, 2010
                                                          •   Jim Luke (alternate)
    • Dana Heil                                           •   Drew Marczak
    • Allen Hodges                                        •   Richard McSpadden
    • Danny Hogan                                         •   Bill Ross
    • Dennis W. Holder, Vice Chair                        •   Benjamin R. Tarbutton
    • Charles H. Jordan
Council Members Absent
    • Jennifer Davis                                      •   Rabun Neal
    • Roger Folsom                                        •   Greg Thompson
    • Pat Graham                                          •   Rep. Terry England (ex-officio)
    • Pat Hardy                                           •   Sen. Bill Cowsert (ex-officio)
    • Kevin Little
Staff and Planning Contractors
    • Kevin Ferrell, EPD                                  •   Heather Dyke, CH2MHill
    • Ted Hendrickx, EPD                                  •   Marci Davis, Jacobs JJG
    • Doug Baughman, CH2MHill                             •   Brian Skeens, CH2M HILL
Partnering Agencies
    • Patti Lanford, Department of Natural Resources – Fisheries
    • Joe Krewer, Department of Community Affairs
    • Chris Nelson – Department of Natural Resources
    • Tas Smith, Georgia Farm Bureau
    • Harold West, Georgia Forestry Commission
General Public
    • Kenneth Turner, City of Gordon
    • Herbie Johnson, Georgia Power
    • Bryan Rogers, Laurens County
    • Glenn Coleman, Athens-Clarke County Public Utilities Department
    • Ethan Armentrout, Armentrout Matheny Thurmond Consulting Group
    • Ben Emanuel, Altamaha Riverkeeper
    • Katherine Cummings, Fall-Line Alliance for a Cleaner Environment
    • John Clayton, Hazen and Sawyer
 