WordingHelp ensure protection and management of surface and ground water recharge areas to ensure sufficient long-term water supplies for the region.Identify opportunities to maximize and optimize existing and future supplies.Promote water conservation and water use efficiency for all water use sectors to allow for sufficient long-term water supplies.Identify opportunities to better prepare for and respond to climate and water supply variability and extremes.Identify and implement cost effective water management strategies"Manage and develop water resources to sustainably and reliably meet domestic, commercial, agricultural, and industrial water needs."Manage ground and surface water to encourage sustainable economic and population growth in the regionIdentify opportunities to minimize excessive regulations and the resulting negative economic impacts (especially in rural areas); while maintaining quality and quantity of water supply."Ensure an adequate water supply of suitable quality to meet current and future human, environmental and recreational needs of the region and citizens of Georgia.""Optimize existing water and wastewater infrastructure, including identifying opportunities to implement regional water and wastewater facilities.""Identify opportunities to manage water, wastewater, and stormwater to improve water quantity and quality, while providing for wise land management, wetland protection, and wildlife sustainability."Work collaboratively with other regions that share resources to help ensure that activities outside the Altamaha Region do not adversely impact the region."Promote alternatives and technologies that conserve, reuse, return, and recycle water within the Upper Oconee region.""Ensure that management practices balance economic development, recreation, and environmental interests."Educate stakeholders in the region on the importance of water quality and managing water as a resource including practices such as water conservation and increased water efficiency.Encourage the development of and accessibility to data and information to guide management decisions."Identify programs, projects, and educational messages to reduce non-point source pollution to protect water quality in lakes and streams.""Recommend innovative strategies (water, sewer, and/or stormwater) that provide sufficient revenues to maintain a high level of service while promoting water conservation and efficiency.""Identify and plan measures to ensure sustainable, adequate water supply to meet current and predicted long-term population, environmental, and economic needs."Lead the development and implementation of water resource policy in this region and work together with the state and federal government and with the other regional councils to ensure that the welfare and needs of our region are met.Enhance public understanding of water resources and provide stakeholders with an opportunity for input into regional water policy.Maintain and strive to improve the quality and quantity of our water resources in order to protect natural ecosystems and public health."Manage water resources sustainably through the three ""C's"" of conserving, capturing and controlling water in order to provide for the needs of all water users in the region (agriculture, utilities, residential, commercial, industry, forestry, and recreation)."Sustain the region's aquifers and surface waters in a way that will continue to support the economic activities of the Upper Flint Region and the economy of the State of Georgia.Ensure that actions taken by this Council do not impede the agriculture and forestry based economy of this region."Manage and develop water resources to sustainably and reliably meet domestic, commercial, industrial water needs, and agricultural water needs including all agricultural sectors (this includes the agro forestry economy of the region)."Manage ground and surface water to encourage sustainable economic and population growth in the region.Manage the region's and state's water resources in a manner that preserves and protects private property rights."Ensure an adequate water supply of suitable quality to meet current and future human needs, while protecting environmental resources.""Identify opportunities to optimize existing and future supplies, and water and wastewater infrastructure."Promote efficient use and management of surface and groundwater resources to allow for sufficient supplies for current and future generations.Protect and manage surface and groundwater recharge areas to ensure sufficient long-term water supplies for the region."Protect, maintain, and where appropriate and practicable, identify opportunities to enhance water quality and river base flows."Protect and maintain regional water-dependent recreational opportunities.Identify opportunities to manage stormwater to improve water quantity and quality.Identify and implement cost effective water management strategies.Seek to provide economically affordable power and water resource service to all citizens of the region.Identify and implement actions to better measure and share water use data and information."Manage and develop high quality water resources to sustainably and reliably meet domestic, commercial, industrial and agricultural water needs."Identify fiscally responsible and implementable opportunities to maximize existing and future supplies including promoting water conservation and reuse."Optimize existing water and wastewater infrastructure, including identifying opportunities to implement regional water and wastewater facilities.""Protect and maintain regional recreation, ecosystems, and cultural and historic resources that are water dependent to enhance the quality of life of our current and future citizens, and help support tourism and commercial activities."Identify and utilize best available science and data and apply principles of various scientific disciplines when making water resource management decisions."Identify opportunities to manage stormwater to improve water quantity and quality, while providing for wise land management, wetland protection, and wildlife sustainability.""Plan for sufficient water supplies to support planned economic development while providing residential, industrial, agricultural, recreational, and utility services in a sustainable manner. Request that the State consider and encourage future economic development in areas with adequate water resources."Provide support for current (2011) state laws regulating interbasin transfers in Official Code of Georgia (OCGA) 12-5-584(f) and OCGA 12-5-31 and further described in EPD Rule 391-3-6-.07. Promote the development of a mandatory comprehensive evaluation process that protects donor basins from adverse impacts from proposed interbasin transfers between State Water Planning Districts.Work with EPD to establish ongoing relationships with South Carolina stakeholders and other Water Planning Councils to equitably address water sharing issues.Work to enhance the public's understanding of regional water issues and the need for support of new policies to protect future resources.Identify opportunities for water reuse and conservation in the region.Maintain and strive to improve the quality and quantity of the water of the region to protect species and habitat while balancing the needs of humans.Form a permanent Savannah and Ogeechee water planning organization as the conduit for bringing together all stakeholders and assisting the State with implementation of water resource goals in the entire basin. Grandfather one third of the current Water Planning Council on the permanent organization.Ensure access to water resources for existing and future water users in the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Region."Sustain the region's aquifers, the Floridan, the Claiborne, the Clayton, and the Cretaceous, in a healthy condition that will continue to support the natural systems and economic activities of the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Region."Maintain the production-agriculture-based economy of the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Region.Support sustainable economic growth in the region.Maximize existing water supply sources to the extent practicable.Support the protection of natural stream integrity and the recreation it provides.Promote sufficient water supply for the region.Promote efficient use of water.Promote properly managed wastewater discharges and beneficial reuse.Support the reduction of non-point source pollution by advocating better land management practices."Support planning and management of water resources to maintain a healthy economy, ensure a high quality of life, and protect our natural resources."The plan will provide the technical basis to help resolve the issues pertaining to water resources management and competing interests"The plan will provide guidance for effective policies and appropriate actions during drought, economic uncertainty, regulatory or political influences, and affects of climate variability.""The Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint (ACF) river systems are a unique asset within the region. The management of the rivers and their uses (hydropower, navigation, water quality, water supply, flood control, fish and wildlife conservation, recreation and cooling water for nuclear and coal-fired power plants) are vital to the region. the plan will recommend adjustments to the management directives and uses of the river systems in order to achieve a balance of future water requirements within the region.""The plan will acknowledge the increasing tax value of land and resulting trends: increasing urbanization, fewer natural forests, and decreasing agricultural land. However the plan will seek to encourage agricultural land and forest land conservation by providing for their water requirements.""The plan will provide a better understanding of water balance and consumptive use and clearly define returns to surface water, the need for storage, and provide guidance for the increasing trend for groundwater usage."The plan will address the water needs for an increasing [resident] population as well as the increased transient population at such locations as Fort Benning.The plan will establish the necessary goals to achieve water quality and quantity throughout the Middle Chattahoochee basin."The plan will encourage forest, agriculture, and open land and habitat preservation. It will also encourage cost-effective alternative energy sources, water conservation, and sustained protection of habitat and natural resources.""Plan for appropriate levels of water storage, water sources, and long-term supply to meet anticipated need for local communities.""Minimize adverse effects to local communities and adjacent regions, and, when possible, enhance natural systems."Ensure that management practices support economic development and optimize existing water and wastewater infrastructure."Promote alternative technologies that conserve, return, and recycle water; protect water quality; and ensure adequate capacity for water storage within the Region."Promote properly managed wastewater discharges."Educate stakeholders in the Region on the importance of water resources, including water conservation, efficiency, and pollution prevention.""Identify practices that reduce nonpoint source pollution and control stormwater to protect and enhance water quality and ecosystems in lakes and streams, particularly those in priority watersheds and listed streams.""Develop an ongoing adaptive management approach to measure, share, and evaluate water use data and information."