B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.4 November 19, 2009  To:  Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  From:  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC and Robert Osborne, Black & Veatch  cc:  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD  Subject:  Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 4 on November 17, 2009  The council meeting was held on November 17, 2009 at the Bridge House in Albany. The list of attendees is attached. In addition to these minutes, all the presentations (slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Lower Flint Ochlockonee web portal (http://www.flintochlockonee.org/). Invocation, Welcome, and Introductions Council Chair Richard Royal stated that a quorum was present. He welcomed attendees and thanked everyone for attending. The public sign-in sheet is included as an attachment. John Bridges provided the invocation. Next, Chuck Lingle welcomed the members to Albany, and Jeff Bodine Sinyard, Chair of the Dougherty County Commissioners, and Lisa Riddle, Director of the Albany Convention and Visitors Bureau made brief statements of welcome. The council thanked Dougherty County for providing the meeting facility, refreshments, lunch, and Riverquarium admission. Richard reviewed the agenda. The agenda was modified slightly to accommodate the lunch plans. A scheduled lunchtime speaker will be re-scheduled for a future meeting. With no objections, the agenda was approved.  Council Meeting 3 Re-cap and Meeting Summary Review Kristin Rowles summarized Council Meeting 3 which included: • • •  Review of the draft agricultural water demand forecast (comments still welcome, formed subcommittee) Approval of MOA Documents Discussion of vision statement  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009 • • • • •  Page 2 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Review of Public Involvement Plan (Revised for consideration at Council Meeting 4) Overview of existing Flint Plan Introduction to resource assessments and planning guidance Review of municipal and industrial water demand forecast methodology Discussion of management practices and upcoming joint council meetings  Kristin then provided a summary of the evaluations for Council Meeting 3. She said many respondents (61%) felt that the meeting provided ample explanation of the goals and timeframe of the regional water planning process and helped them understand their roles and responsibilities as council members, but 39% felt there could have been more discussion of the process. Kristin said that, in general, Council members tell her that they would like less focus on process, and so she was concerned that so many said they would like to hear more about the process. She said that she would do a little bit of review of that material today and asked that council members let her know when they need more information on a particular topic. Kristin also reported that members thought the council meeting was extremely useful for 44% of the respondents, and 56% of the respondents found it to be somewhat useful. She said about two-thirds of the members reported using the regional council web site. A more detailed breakdown of the evaluation results are available in the Introduction and Vision PowerPoint slides on the council website. Richard Royal asked if members had any comments or edits to the Council Meeting 3 Meeting Summary. There were no comments. With no objections, the Council Meeting 3 Meeting Summary was approved. Chairman’s Discussion Richard Royal said he still has not heard from the Governor in response to the council’s request that open seats on the council be filled by an alternate. Next, Richard discussed the Governor’s Water Contingency Task Force, which is part of the overall response to Judge Magnuson's July ruling regarding metropolitan Atlanta’s use of Lake Lanier for water supply. He reported that one of the Governor’s strategies is contingency planning, which is the focus of the task force (other actions include appeal, negotiation, and Congressional reauthorization of the lake project). The task force is comprised of over 80 business, environment, and government leaders. Richard discussed some of the alternatives being discussed by the task force, including new offline storage reservoirs and alternate water sources. Richard reviewed upcoming milestones for the task force’s work and noted that it would be complete in mid-December, prior to the legislative session. Richard noted some concerns about the task force regarding how  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 3 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  closely its interests will be aligned with those of this region. He said that he would keep the Council informed about the Task Force. Vision and Goals George McIntosh presented the report of the vision subcommittee. He said that the subcommittee liked the vision developed by the Joint Comprehensive Water Study Committee, and so they adapted this statement to this region, as follows:  The Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council will manage water resources in a sustainable manner to support the region’s economy, to protect public health and natural systems, and to enhance the quality of life for the region’s citizens. John Bridges commented that production agriculture should be stressed in the vision statement. Kristin noted that some issues could also be addressed by in the goals, if not in the vision statement directly. After some discussion, there was a motion and a second to adopt the vision statement as written by the Vision Subcommittee. However, there was not consensus. Kristin recommended that the council try talking about the goals discussed by the Vision Subcommittee, and then coming back to the Vision statement. She said that in the subcommittee’s discussion of the vision statement, they had set aside several ideas that they would like to include in the list of goals, as follows: 1. Ensure access to water resources for existing water users in the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region. 2. Sustain the Floridan Aquifer in a healthy condition that will continue to support the natural systems and economic activities of the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region. 3. Maintain the rural integrity of the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region. After some discussion, the goals were edited as follows: 1. Ensure access to water resources for existing and future water users in the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region. 2. Sustain the region’s aquifers, most particular the Floridan aquifer, in a healthy condition that will continue to support the natural systems and economic activities of the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region. 3. Maintain the production agriculture based economy of the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region. 4. Support sustainable economic growth in the region  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 4 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Kristin noted that the list of goals offered by the subcommittee was not designed to be comprehensive, and the council should consider whether anything had been missed. She referred them to the list of guiding principles from the Joint Comprehensive Water Study, which the subcommittee had thought would be helpful as the council considered drafting its goals. No one suggested additional goals or modifications. The Council approved these goals unanimously. Then, the Council returned to the vision statement. The members discussed modifying the statement as follows: The Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council will manage water resources in a sustainable manner to support the region’s economy, to include agricultural and industrial needs, to protect public health and natural systems, and to enhance the quality of life for the region’s citizens. There was a motion to amend the outstanding motion to include the revised language above. The Council did not have consensus on the motion to amend, and so they voted on the motion to amend, and the motion to amend failed by a 2 to 1 margin. The Council then returned to the original motion to accept the vision statement originally proposed by the Vision subcommittee. Because the Council did not have consensus, this motion was voted on, and the original vision statement was adopted (16 yes, 3 no). Public Involvment Plan Kristin reviewed several edits to the Public Involvement Plan (PIP), which was presented at the last meeting. The revised PIP was included in the Council’s pre-meeting packet. Kristin asked if there were any additional comments or concerns. One council member suggested adding a mailing address for EPD on page 3. Kristin asked Tim Cash if this is something he could assist with. Tim said he could provide the address. With no objections, the revised Public Involvement Plan was adopted with the one change noted above.  Regional WDCP Outline Kristin said that she would next be discussing the primary parts of the regional water development and conservation plan (WDCP) and, in this discussion, she would review some of the important milestones, roles, and responsibilities in the planning process.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 5 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  First, she noted that the State Water Plan (Section 14(7)) lays out required principal elements of for WDCPs: • • • • • •  Describe the region’s water resources, water users, local governments and education and implementation partners Forecast through 2050: population, domestic water use, commercial water use Compare forecasts with the water resource assessments Based on the comparison, recommended management practices for region Outline additional data and information needs Determine benchmarks for assessing plan effectiveness  Next, Kristin noted some things that Council Members need to consider for the WDCP: • Plans will have a mix of EPD-provided information and Council-led products • “Audiences” for plan • Fulfillment of regional vision and goals • Maps, figures, tables • Council member expectations • “Extra elements” beyond the minimum She noted that a Table of Contents for the plan will be available at Council Meeting 5 (CM5). Kristin reviewed Council roles and responsibilities, as shown below, noting which were already addressed or underway.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 6 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  RegionalRegional Water Planning Water Council Planning Roles Council and Responsibilities Roles and Responsibilities 1: Attend and actively participate in regional water planning council meetings 2: Sign a MOA and follow operating procedures 3: Finalize and follow the Public Involvement Plan 4: Receive and incorporate input from local governments and the public 5: Draft regional vision and update throughout the planning process 6: Understand the water resource assessments 7: Understand forecasts of water and wastewater demands 8: Compare results of resource assessments with water and wastewater forecasts in order to identify any “gaps” 9: Select, refine, and finalize selection of management practices 10: Coordinate with neighboring regional water planning councils regarding the selected water management practices 11: Prepare a recommended regional water plan and submit to the Director of EPD for review and approval. Make revisions based on comments from EPD and the public.  Council Member John Heath asked how the council would be able to act to address factors like the Tri-State water litigation or extreme drought, particularly with respect to agricultural water use. Kristin noted there are many things beyond the control of the Council, and it was important to consider these factors and plan for them. Kristin said she wanted to define a couple of terms the council will be hearing quite a bit in the coming months:     Water Resource “Gap”: For quantity, this is the difference between the available resource (i.e., supply) and the sum of needs/demands. For quality, this is the difference between the capacity of receiving waters to assimilate wastewater and the sum of needs/demands associated with the discharge of wastewater. A gap may be defined geographically or by water use type (surface water, groundwater). Management Practice: Any program or activity that helps meet the regional vision and goals or that can be employed to ensure that there is sufficient water (surface and groundwater quantity) and assimilative capacity (surface water quality) to sustainably meet future needs. Management practices can increase resource capacity and/or adjusts forecasted demands.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 7 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Kristin then reviewed the next steps for this process which included: • • • •  Resource Assessment Models – Available January 2010 (Joint Council Meetings) Management Practices Survey – Early 2010 Initial discussion, selection, and refinement of Management Practices – Council Meetings 5, 6, and 7 Finalize selection of Management Practices by December 2010  At this time, Richard Royal reminded the Council of information that they had received regarding the resignation of the EPD Director, Carol Couch, and the appointment of a new EPD Director, Allen Barnes. Agricultural Water Demand Forecasts Kristin reminded the members about the review of the agricultural water demand forecasts at the last council meeting. She said that input was still being sought to identify data gaps in forecasts and that the forecasts available through council website. Next, she explained several things that had happened since the last council meeting to address “gaps” in the forecasts. First, Chairman Royal established a subcommittee to evaluate the forecasts and address any gaps in them. Next, the Farm Bureau worked with several statewide agricultural organizations and state agencies to develop state level estimates for various agricultural sectors that were not included in the forecasts (non-irrigation agricultural water use and users below 100,000 gallons/day). The issue causing the most concern was that water use for livestock, dairy, poultry, and nursery are not captured in the current Agricultural Water Demand Forecast (AWDF). Members of these agricultural sectors feel they are not represented in Georgia’s water planning efforts and believe their exclusion diminishes their economic importance to Georgia. Therefore, the Georgia Farm Bureau organized effort sought to investigate options for including these water uses in regional planning council efforts. Several water planning councils have formed subcommittees to investigate these types of agricultural water-use. Through the Georgia Farm Bureau led effort, data are currently being compiled from the various sectors of concern, and/or it is expected that these data will be available to the subcommittees and councils in the next few weeks. These estimates will provide a “snap-shot” of current data in these agricultural water-use sectors, but will not include projections of future use. Upon receipt of these estimates, the councils and the subcommittees can decide on how to include this information in their own regional plans.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 8 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Next, Jerry Lee, who is the Chair of this council’s subcommittee on agricultural water use, stated that he felt comfortable about on-going efforts to address concerns with the forecasts. He will be working with the subcommittee when the estimates become available. Kristin noted that Cliff Lewis from EPD was available to address questions if needed. Planning for Joint Meetings Kristin reminded the council that the objective of the upcoming joint council meetings is to provide Council members with a working knowledge of the resource assessments, both the process and the results. The working knowledge will facilitate understanding of the resource assessments and allow planning to move forward with Gap Analysis and Management Practices Selection. One council member asked if attendance was a requirement. Kristin noted that this was not a requirement. A council member asked if we would have a council meeting in Janaruy. Kristin responded that the next Council meeting would be in March (2010). Next, Kristin reviewed the agenda for the joint council meetings: • •  • •  Welcome and Charge to Meeting Participants (15-30 minutes) Resource Assessment Presentation and Discussion: Ground Water (~90 minutes ), Surface Water Quantity (~90 minutes) and Surface Water Quality (~100 minutes) • Overview of Methodology and Assumptions • Results Specific to the Basin; Crosses planning council boundaries Future steps and wrap up (20-45 minutes) Technical Discussions Open House (stations for each resource assessment) (60-120 minutes)  Kristin then reviewed both the watersheds and groundwater maps to help as Council Members decide which Joint Meeting to attend. The Lower Flint Ochlockonee Council was originally slated to attend two joint meetings:  Flint & Ochlockonee River Basins/Dougherty Plain, Claiborne Aquifers (Jan. 15, 2010/Americus)  Satilla, Suwanee & St. Mary’s River Basins/South Central Georgia Floridan Aquifer (Jan. 28, 2010/Waycross) The Chairman also requested that the council participate in the following meeting:  Chattahoochee River Basin/Piedmont Aquifer (Feb. 1, 2010/Columbus or Callaway Gardens)  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 9 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Kristin provided a sign-up sheet for the joint meetings and asked members to indicate which they planned to attend. Municipal and Industrial Forecasts Robert Osborne’s presentation on the municipal and industrial water use forecasts was moved forward on the agenda because the meeting was ahead of schedule. Robert presented slides on the methodology for the forecasts of municipal, industrial, and energy water demands. For the industrial forecasts, he reviewed the industrial sectors (organized by SIC codes) included in the forecasts. He emphasized that for the industrial forecasts employment data was used as proxy for water use. He shared some of the initial forecast results. One council member asked when the forecasts would be more final. Robert answered that results would be presented at Council Meeting 5. Another member commented about his concern about assumptions in the forecasts regarding consumptive use for land application systems and for agriculture. These are assumed to be 100% consumptive. For the municipal water use forecasts, Robert said that the while the model was prepared, the population estimates needed to complete the forecasts were not yet available. They are still being reviewed by OPB. Robert said he was recently informed that the population estimates may not be available until January. One council member asked how the industrial forecasts accounted for the effects of the recession. Kristin answered that the employment forecasts had been adjusted to account for the current recession, and because employment is used as a proxy for water use, the effects of the recession should be incorporated into the industrial forecasts. Robert presented the county level per capita projections of water use and noted that feedback was still welcome on those estimates. Last, Robert discussed the methods being used to develop forecasts for the energy production sector. The Chairman asked how the per capita use estimates were developed by county. Robert answered that the source was USGS. The Chairman asked how USGS estimates residential well withdrawals. Robert was not sure, but the planning contractors offered get back to the council with an answer to that question. Robert’s slides are available on the council website.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 10 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Public Officials and Public Comments David Burke with Oil Dri Coportation offered to share mining data with the Council to assist with the industrial water demand forecasts. Gordon Rogers, the new Flint Riverkeeper, commented that he is located here in the Albany and available to assist. He is also a members of the Suwannee Satilla Regional Water Planning Council. Jeffery Harvey with Georgia Farm Bureau mentioned that he is available for assistance also. Kristin noted that Jeffery has been very helpful to the regional water planning councils by organizing the effort to compile additional agricultural water use data statewide. month. Council Meeting 5 Planning Because there was extra time before lunch, Kristin asked the members to select a date for the next Council meeting. She asked them to choose between March 8 and 25. The Council agreed on Monday, March 22, 2009 for the next meeting. The meeting will be held in Bainbridge. Kristin will check on the availability of Bainbridge College for the meeting. The Council broke for lunch at the Riverquarium, provided by Doughterty County. Resource Assessments Kristin introduced Dr. Wei Zeng from EPD. Dr. Zeng is leading the surface water availability assessment. At this meeting, Dr. Zeng focused on the methodology for the assessment. The results of the assessment will be presented at the joint meetings in January. Dr. Zeng distributed several map hand-outs. These hand-outs are available through the Council’s web portal. The graphic below, from Dr. Zeng’s slides, describes the modeling process being used in the assessment. In summary, the assessment is considering: How much water we are using? How much water Mother Nature has given us? How much water can we reliably use without compromising the needs of downstream users and in-stream flow needs?  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009 Demand Data Compilation * Contractor (EPD Assistance)  Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec  Observed Flow Data Compilation * Contractor  1-Jan  1-Feb  1-Mar  1-Apr  1-May  1-Jun  1-Jul  1-Aug  1-Sep  1-Oct  1-Nov  B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Future Demands *EPD Unimpaired Flow Data Development * Contractor  1-Jan  1-Feb  1-Mar  1-Apr  1-May  1-Jun  1-Jul  1-Aug  1-Sep  1-Oct  1-Nov  Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec  Future Assessment (Planning) * EPD/ Contractor  1-Dec  Resource Assessment Current * Contractor (EPD)  Information  1-Dec  Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec  River Basin Delineation * EPD  Best Practices Selection and Refinement * Regional Councils  Basic Node Sub-basin  Desired Flow Regime * EPD Jan  Planning Node  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec  River Basin Planning Tool * Georgia Tech Water Resources Institute  3  Dr. Zeng explained the development of estimates for “unimpaired flows”. An “unimpaired flow” is what you would have with no human activity in a river system. To estimate unimpaired flows, the team is looking at withdrawals, discharges, and reservoir operations and removing these effects from the USGS data on flows from 1939 to 2007. He said that for water use, good data only goes back to the 1990s, and so estimates had to be made for historical use back to 1939. He said that reservoir operation data dating back to 1939 is available. Dr. Zeng discussed the maps that were distributed. These maps showed the planning nodes used in the model and the users and discharges of water in each segment. These maps will be made available on the website. Next Dr. Zeng presented to the Council additional slides regarding the comparison of the agricultural water forecasts to the existing agricultural water metering data. His slides are available on the council web portal. His slides compared dry year estimates for irrigation from the Hook forecasts to dry year meter data for 2007.  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Agricultural Surface Water Use in ACF Basin Methodology  EPD Estimate Based on Hook Methodology Soil Conservation Commission Metering Data (2007)  Irrigation Volume (acre-feet)  Irrigated Acreage (acre)  Corresponding Application Rate (inches)  124,105  166,781  8.9  76,173  105,876 (linked to systems with metering data)  5.5 ~ 8.6 (depending on total acreage or linked acreage)  B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Agricultural Groundwater Use from Floridan Aquifer in Sub-area 4 Methodology  EPD Estimate Based on Hook Methodology Soil Conservation Commission Metering Data (2007)  Irrigation Volume (acre-feet)  Irrigated Acreage (acre)  Corresponding Application Rate (inches)  436,318  378,875  13.8  358,713  273,776 (linked to systems with metering data)  11.4 ~ 15.7 (depending on total acreage or linked acreage)  Council members had several questions and comments about the comparison. One council member said that the application rates for surface water were way too low and could not be accurate. Other council members were concerned that the meter data was not being used in the planning process. Some had questions about the irrigated acreage estimates and how they related to application rate calculations. At least one member suggested that Dr. Zeng use the higher volume applied per acre (for groundwater) from the metering data to all irrigated acreage included in the Hook forecasts to estimate water demand. He said he would consider this. Mark Masters of the Georgia Water Planning and Policy Center helped to answer why the acreages were not the same and explained that they would not be the same until the Soil and Water Conservation Commission completed the metering program. He noted that the acreages used in the forecasts include all metered sites, plus permitted areas not yet metered, and additional wetted acreage that is not permitted or metered but visible from aerial photos. Because of the extensive discussion and questions about this topic, Chairman Royal established a subcommittee to address this issue. The subcommittee will include the following members:  John Bridges  Hal Haddock  T.E. Moye  Jimmy Webb  Doyle Medders  Mike Newberry  Greg Murray  Steve Bailey (add at end of meeting)  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 13 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Chairman Royal thanked Dr. Zeng for his presentation and emphasized that the Council was just interested in getting the data right and looked forward to working with the speaker and others to do so. Water Quality Assessment Brian Watson of TetraTech Inc. gave this presentation. He said Dr. Liz Booth of EPD could not make it to this meeting. The Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) with the assistance of Tetra Tech, Inc. is preparing an assessment of assimilative capacity state-wide using a variety of computer models. The surface water quality assessment involves determining the streams assimilative capacity. The assimilative capacity is the amount of contaminant load that can be discharged to a specific waterbody without exceeding water quality standards or criteria. The assimilative capacity is used to define the ability of a waterbody to naturally absorb and use a discharged substance without water quality becoming impaired or aquatic life being harmed. Brian noted a stream that is impaired is one that is not meeting the water quality standard for a given parameter. This means that the ability of the stream to assimilate that parameter has been exceeded. These are the impaired streams on the 305(b)/303(d) that are listed for organics, pH and toxicity. He said there are not too many of them. The streams in south Georgia that are impaired for dissolved oxygen are typically listed because the standard we use to assess the waters does not account for the naturally low DO observed in these streams. Thus, EPD will be revising the DO standard in 2010 as part of the implementation of the State Water Plan. Brian also explained that Fecal coliform standard would also be evaluated and possibly revised to be more indicative of human health risks.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 14 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Impaired Stream Segments  The Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) is preparing an assessment of assimilative capacity availability state-wide. EPD will determine the available assimilative capacity for the state rivers, streams, lakes and estuaries by developing water quality models for these waterbodies using available data, and conservative assumptions. The models will be calibrated to existing field data and discharge data from the same time period. The current wasteload allocations will be evaluated by inputting the permitted and newly proposed dischargers into the model at their permit limits. The results of the model will provide areas with available assimilative capacity and areas that are already overallocated or where there are other challenges. To determine a waterbody’s assimilative capacity, EPD will use computer models including the steady state models GA DOSAG and GA ESTUARY, the hydrodynamic model GA RIV-1 that are used to model dissolved oxygen levels in a waterbody that are needed by the fish in the rivers, streams, and estuaries, and the watershed model LSPC, and lake and estuary models EFDC and/or WASP that are used to model dissolved oxygen, nutrients, and algae levels. EPD will be develop steady state GA DOSAG models for the whole state and GA ESTUARY models for those estuaries that have discharges in them. We have developed and will be updating the one dimensional hydrodynamic GA-RIV-1 models for the Chattahoochee River downstream from Lake Lanier to West Point, the Coosa River from Lakes Allatoona and Carters and downstream of Eton, and the Savannah River downstream from Thurmond Dam around Augusta.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 15 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  EPD will also be developing watershed models for those areas that are shaded green on this map. Lake models for Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair in the Oconee River Basin and Lake Jackson in the the Ocmulgee River Basin. An estuary model for the Brunswick Harbor. Watershed models for the Coosa River and Savannah River Basins will be input into the previously discussed GA-RIV-1 models, and watershed, river and lake models will be developed for the Chattahoochee River Basin downstream for Burford Dam and the entire Flint River Basin. The watershed models LSPC will be developed and linked to three dimensional hydrodynamic lake and estuary models EFDC or WASP. The watershed models will predict the flow and storm water quality based on landcover, impervious surface, surface slope, soil, and meteorological data. The flow data will be input into the hydrodynamic model EFDC and this model will determine the lake or estuary water temperatures and surface elevations. The volumes and velocities from this model will be input into WASP or EFDC along with the water quality data from the watershed model and this model will predict the in-lake or estuary water quality. The milestones for completion include:        DoSAG Models (Cal/Val) – December 2009 Current Assimilative Capacity Runs – January 2010 Watershed Model (Cal/Val) – June 2010 River Model (Cal/Val) – September 2010 Lake Blackshear Model (Cal/Val) – September 2010 Current Assimilative Capacity Runs (Watershed, River and Lake) – November 2010 The future assimilative capacity assessment will be performed using the calibrated models to evaluate the water quality impact of forecasted flows, proposed discharge locations, and future landuse patterns. Based on the model results, a range of discharge allocation options will be proposed. Using an iterative approach, these and various other options will be evaluated. Best management practices will be used to bridge the gaps. For instance, future land use patterns may show increases in impervious surfaces that cause the baseflow in the streams to decrease. Thus in turn may lead to smaller wasteload allocations. The Regional Councils may chose to accept the tighter limits, they may choose to move the location of the discharge to another stream that has more assimilative capacity or they may chose to use green infrastructures as a best management practice so that more storm water can get into the ground and thus increase the baseflow and the wasteload allocation. Brian said the baseline resource assessments should be completed by the end of the year and then using the future withdrawals and returns that will be provided by the councils, we will being to run the future scenarios.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  Page 16 B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  One person asked if DOSAG models will used on industrial wastewater use. Brian said yes. Wrap-Up and What to Expect Next Meeting The Council selected March 22 for its next meeting, which will be held in Bainbridge. Kristin will check on availability of meeting space at Bainbridge College on this date. Council Meeting 4 Evaluation At the conclusion of the council meeting, the members completed an evaluation form on the meeting, and the meeting was adjourned.  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 17  Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 4 Meeting Date: November 17, 2009  B&V Project 164139 November 19, 2009  Attachment 1: Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting Attendance – November 17, 2009 Council Members Steve Bailey Dean Burke Jerry Chapman John A. Heath Huddy Hudgens Jr. (Alternate) Jerry Lee George C. McIntosh (Alternate) Greg Murray A. Richard Royal (Chair) Howard G. Small, Jr. Jimmy Webb  John M. Bridges Jimmy Champion Hal Haddock (Vice Chair) Chris Hobby Gary W. Leddon Chuck Lingle T.E. Moye Mike Newberry Steve Singletary Will Vereen Bill Yearta  Council Members Not In Attendance John Bulloch (Ex-Officio) Bob Hanner (Ex-Officio) Doyle Medders (Alternate) Jim Quinn  Terry Clark Josh Herring Rick Moss Steve Sykes  Planning Consultants Robert Osborne, B&V Mark Masters, GWPPC Georgia EPD Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief Bill Morris Georgia State Agencies Ben Mosely, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Service Luke Crosson, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Service Joe Krewer, GA Department of Community Affairs  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC Nils Thompson, LBG   Robert Osborne 29 58 8 30 10 109 1 333 0 EST NA MEETING MINUTES  11302009_LFO_CM4_MEETINGMINUTES.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 9.0 for Word 