Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232  FAX: 404/675-6247  November 24, 2009 MEMORANDUM  TO:  Council Members  FROM:  Jeff Larson, GA EPD Bill Martello, JJG  SUBJECT:  Council Meeting 4 Summary Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council  Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan Regional Water Planning Council Meeting 4 Summary Meeting Date: Location:  November 10, 2009 Thomson Depot 111 Railroad Street Thomson, GA 30824  Attendees: See list (1) Welcome and Introductions Chairman Cross welcomed all to the meeting and asked the public members to introduce themselves. Chairman Cross introduced himself as Chair of the Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Regional Water Planning Council and Charlie Newton as Vice Chair. Charlie welcomed everyone to the Thomson Depot, built in 1860. He introduced council member Chris McCorkle and said that the field trip scheduled after the meeting was cancelled due to weather.  Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   (2) Columbia County Town Hall Meeting Chairman Cross briefed the members on the Columbia County Town Hall Meeting also attended by Dan Fowler and Tim McGill. Chairman Cross described the meeting as an orientation on what they are doing as a council and what they thought the Governor’s Water Task Force would be doing. The Chairman thought the Town Hall Meeting was a good initial meeting with the general public. Chairman Cross asked EPD at what point do we get something substantial to share with the public – the council does not have OPB population projections yet, but do have some industrial information and groundwater assessment results. The Chairman distributed the attachment from the Municipal Water and Wastewater Forecasting Ad Hoc meeting on October 2, 2009 at the Phinizy Swamp Center about each county’s water consumption. Bill Martello said that they have received comments on the water consumption information, and would discuss this further later in the meeting. (3) Governor’s Water Task Force Chairman Cross said that there was a statewide conference call for the members of Governor’s Water Task Force (Task Force) scheduled at 2:00 PM today. The Task Force staff is in the process of assembling information on water supply alternatives to fill the gap if Judge Magnuson’s ruling holds, and will meet this month and again at a final meeting in December. The Task Force will present recommendations to the General Assembly at the conclusion of their work in December. Chairman Cross stated that there was an offer for the council to call in at 11:00 AM to speak with the Task Force staff. Chairman Cross attended the first meeting of the Task Force at the Governor’s mansion. He asked EPD representatives about the Task Force at the Municipal Water and Wastewater Forecasting Ad Hoc meeting at Phinizy Swamp in Augusta; specifically, how will the planning councils interact with the Task Force? At the time of the meeting, the EPD representative attending the meeting was not fully apprised of the work the Task Force would be doing. Chairman Cross stated that the Task Force is comprised of about 80 members, co-chaired by John Brock from Coca-Cola and Tim Lowe of Lowe Engineering. There will be two additional meetings from now until the end of the year. It was thought the Task Force would present alternate choices for water planning to the General Assembly to support any needed legislative proposals in response to Judge Magnuson’s ruling. Chairman Cross asked council members to discuss questions that the council would ask at the 11AM am conference call. Chairman Cross asked at the Task Force meeting, how the task force information will play into the work of the regional water planning councils. The Governor expects the Task Force and the regional water planning councils to compliment each other’s work. The regional councils are meant to be a long-term planning effort and the Task Force a short-term planning effort, to provide the General Assembly with water supply alternatives to consider during the next legislative session. The Task Force was formed specifically in response to the ruling forbidding water supply use of Lake Lanier. It was brought up to the Governor that if Georgia is going to make progress with water supply, we will need to change the   2    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   current limitations on interbasin transfers. Senator Tolleson asked in the meeting about the potential change of interbasin transfer law. The Governor’s office was not ready to discuss the issue yet, as much work was needed to review all water supply options. Chairman Cross said that he had a conversation with the Governor’s Chief of Staff, and he indicated that the Governor is leaning toward local control of water resources. The State is in the process of appealing Judge Magnuson’s decision on Lake Lanier. Chairman Cross said that Senator Isakson thinks there is potential this could be worked out in Washington, as there are 27 other states that have similar water supply projects and withdrawal situations. Chairman Cross recommended the members to visit the Governor’s Task Force website. [Note from Planning Contractor: there is not an active website for the Task Force, but comments to the Task Force can be submitted to info@gawatertaskforce.com] Discussions on Proposed Resolution Chairman Cross distributed “Georgia Natural Resource Resolution” for the council members’ review – proposing permanent restrictions on interbasin transfer of water. He asked members to review and consider adopting. Larry Walker moved to adopt the resolution and communicate to the Governor’s Task Force; Stan Sheppard seconded the motion. Discussion of the motion ensued: 1. Is EPD managing interbasin transfers so there is no net loss? (Per State Water Plan, no new interbasin transfers of raw water are permitted without detailed study.)[Note from Planning Contractor: Policy on interbasin and intrabasin transfer is described in Section 10 – Water Supply Management Practices, of the State Water Plan (p. 26 and 27) http://www.georgiawatercouncil.org/Files_PDF/water_plan_20080109.pdf 2. Is there a distinction between raw water and finished water, in terms of the ability to be transferred across a basin? (Per State Water Plan, prohibition is on interbasin transfer of raw water.) 3. Clarification of last paragraph in the resolution regarding the present limitation of interbasin transfers remaining in force – is this statement correct? (With respect to the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District, prohibition is on bringing water into the District boundaries. This prohibition of interbasin transfer was included in the legislation establishing the Metro North Georgia Water Planning District. With respect to the State Water Plan, with the exception of the Metro District which addresses interbasin transfers specifically from outside its boundaries, interbasin transfers of raw water are not permitted until further study.) 4. Mike Eskew suggested removing the word “the” in front of “present law” so it is worded as “a law.” (Jeff Larson suggested to see how the assessments come out and evaluate the SUO situation at that time, before making judgment on the interbasin transfers. Chairman Cross disagrees, saying that transfers are not going to work as   3    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   they will have no way to stop them and no way to control them in the future – we should stop them in the beginning or not at all. Bruce Azevedo agreed, referencing water to Los Angeles in California – more infrastructure was built and the growth never stops.) 5. It was noted that the political landscape will change in 2011, and it will be hard to change something in statute after that. 6. Tom Wiedmeier was concerned about the “natural resources” term used in the third paragraph of the resolution – seems too broad and may want to revise it to include only “water” resources? (Chairman Cross clarified that the intention is for a region to work with and within its available resources, whether it is water or mountains or other resources. Chairman Cross also mentioned that there is an opportunity to submit an amended version if needed.) 7. There were concerns about a single law preventing interbasin transfers into the metro area. (Chairman Cross believed it is a dual situation. Jeff Larson said interbasin transfers of raw water are mentioned in the State Water Plan and therefore are linked to State Water Plan legislation; the other mention of interbasin transfer is in the legislation that created the Metro District.) 8. After discussion on wording of the proposed resolution, Chairman Cross said the council should revise, sign and submit today, so as to be able to inform the Governor’s Task Force at the 11:00 AM conference call. The resolution was then unanimously passed. Inga Kennedy said the next steps involve everyone signing the resolution and submitting to EPD and the Planning Contractors. 9. Tom Wiedmeier asked if there was supposed to be an advisory group to this council with representatives from each county and municipality. (There is not an official local government advisory group, however, current scope includes basic level of local government involvement. EPD is working with Association County Commissioner of Georgia (ACCG), Georgia Municipal Association (GMA), as a communication network to inform and gather feedbacks from local governments.) Task Force Conference Call Summary Chairman Cross called into the Governor’s Task Force staff conference call at 11:00 AM. Discussion ensued: 1. What is the Task Force’s primary function and how do the regional councils fit in with the function of the Task Force? (No one knew the Judge’s ruling would happen when the regional water councils were created. One of the Task Force goals is to figure out how to fill the water supply gap in the Metro Atlanta area in 2012, if we can fill the gap, and show a good faith effort in the interim. If we reach 2012 and   4    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   realize we can’t fill the gap, we would like to tell the Federal judge that the State of Georgia has tried its best. The Governor’s Task Force is in the process of evaluating all water supply options to filling the gap in 2012. No option is off the table at this point. ) 2. What information will the Task Force use? The regional councils will submit a draft plan to EPD in January 2011, and will not have data compiled during the course of the Task Force’s work. (The Task Force will not be involved in the regional water councils planning effort, but would like to receive input from the water councils, conservation groups, and EPD.) 3. Is there concern this may be contrary to the water council efforts? (The Task Force hopes to get input from the regional water councils. The Task Force staff is using the best data available at the moment, with the caveat of ongoing work with EPD. This is a work in progress and hopefully all options will be compatible.) 4. Will the Task Force give the regional councils a courtesy briefing before presenting to the legislators? (The chair of each regional council is a member of the Task Force. The work of the Technical Advisory Panel of the Task Force will be shared with all chairs at the next meeting on November 23, 2009. The final Task Force meeting will be held December 11, 2009. The Task Force encourages the chairs to share the information with the members of the councils. So far the Task Force has looked at about 100 options. The Task Force staff said the work currently does not include any legislative recommendations.) 5. Chairman Cross advised the Governor’s Task Force staff that the SUO council has passed a resolution recommending that the present restriction on interbasin transfers be made into a permanent law, and that each river basin should stand alone. The council will send this to the State as an action taken by the council. 6. Tom McCall asked if the Task Force sees any legislation coming from the Governor’s office pertaining to any of this. If so, why are we doing this before the regional water plan is completed? (The Task Force staff was unable to answer this, as there have been no discussions with the Governor about legislation.) 7. Chairman Cross expressed that the SUO council supports the Task Force’s work, but is concerned about the water resources in this region since they are charged with the duty to protect. He realizes this is part of a long process with a legal appeal underway. (The Task Force hopes the effort will put us in a better decision making process. If the council members have any issues, feel free to contact the Task Force staff.)  (4) New EPD Director – Update   5    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   Jeff Larson, EPD Assistant Branch Chief, briefed the members on the new EPD director, Allen Barnes. An announcement containing background and bio information was provided, as well as a memorandum from Director Barnes, assuring his commitment to the State Water Plan and support of the Regional Water Planning Councils. Jeff said that the next leadership forum will be coming up, the council members should let him or the Chair know if there are issues they would like to see on the agenda. (5) Vision & Goals and Public Involvement Plan Bill Martello stated that after the last meeting, electronic copies of the public involvement plan and vision and goals were sent to the members at their request. Bill said that they received comments back from Pat Goran on the public involvement plan and from Tim McGill on the vision and goals. Bill presented two options on the vision statement; one based on council members’ submittal and one based on the “35” Exercise from the kick-off meeting) and also presented visions adopted by two other councils as examples. He also went over the seven draft goals. Bill said that these documents are not set in stone and can be revised as the council review demand forecasts and options to meet demands/needs. Chiarman Cross asked for volunteers to form an ad-hoc committee to work through lunch to combine the comments received. Pat Goran, Larry Walker, Thomas Jordan, and Braye Boardman agreed to review the public involvement plan and vision and goals as a committee. Inga Kennedy provided the comments received to date (including comments received prior to Counting Meeting 3) and assisted the above-mentioned council members with revision during lunch. Vision and Goals After the lunch break, the committee presented changes to the members after their meeting. They added “quantity” in the vision statement. The revised draft Vision for the SavannahUpper Ogeechee Council is as follow: The  Savannah  and  Ogeechee  Rivers  along  with  the  region’s  groundwater  resources  will  provide high quality and quantity water supplies for balanced growth while protecting the  natural  and  built  environments.    The  Savannah  –  Upper  Ogeechee  Regional  Water  Planning  Council,  through  collaboration  with  stakeholders,  will  formulate  river  basin  policies  based  on  current  and  developing  technologies  and  conservation  methods.  Because of the results of our council and other council’s efforts Georgia will be recognized  across the country as the leader in water resource management.   For the goals, the first goal from the draft was moved down the list (now item 7). The resolution passed by the council was referred to with the goal on prohibiting interbasin transfers. A sentence was added to reference the attached resolution (item 2). The word “Conservation” was added along with opportunity to reuse (item 5 below). The protection of   6    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   species and habitat while balancing human needs was introduced in item 6. The revised goals are: 1. Plan for sufficient water supplies to support planned economic development and residential, industrial, agricultural, recreational, and utility services in a sustainable manner. 2. Prohibit interbasin transfers. (See attached resolution passed by the Council during Meeting 4 held on Tuesday, November 10, 2009). 3. Work with EPD to establish ongoing relationships with South Carolina stakeholders and other Water Planning Councils to equitably address water sharing issues. 4. Work to enhance the public’s understanding of regional water issues and the need for support of new policies to protect future resources. 5. Identify opportunities for water reuse and conservation in the region. 6. Maintain and strive to improve the quality and quantity of the water of the region to protect species and habitat while balancing the needs of humans. 7. Form a permanent Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Council as the conduit for bringing together all stakeholders and assisting the State with implementation of water resource goals. Public Involvement Plan The time allowed for notification in the public involvement plan was revised to two weeks instead of 24 hours. There were no other changes suggested by the committee members.  (6) Groundwater Availability Assessment Dr. Jim Kennedy, state geologist with EPD, gave a presentation on groundwater availability assessment. EPD is also working on assessments for surface water quantity and surface water quality. Dr. Kennedy explained the need to prioritize aquifers for sustainable yield modeling. There are multiple aquifers in Georgia; the most significant feature about groundwater in Georgia is the fall line (from Columbus to Macon to Augusta). South of the fall line are multiple coastal plain aquifers, which can provide hundreds to thousands of gallons per minute (86.5% state groundwater use in 2005). North of the fall line are crystalline rock aquifers, which can provide a hundred or couple hundred gallons per minute through cracks. The SUO region crosses the fall line. The more sophisticated sustainable yield models were performed for aquifers located south of the fall line. The “water balance” models were used for aquifers located north of the fall line.   7    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   The approach for the assessment involved updating the USGS regional model (completed in 1997), calibrating the entire regional model, and then telescoping to individual prioritized aquifers. Dr. Kennedy showed an example of a telescoped aquifer model – a 3D model, where they performed multiple simulations to see how much groundwater could be obtained from the aquifer. Groundwater withdrawals at current areas of high use were capped for the simulations. This was completed for all coastal plain aquifers. Both steady state modeling (taking up a constant pumping rate) and transient modeling (seasonal effect of groundwater withdrawals from agricultural activities) were performed. Water balances were completed, accounting for inputs from precipitation and recharge and outputs from wells and going to streams. Groundwater withdrawals were compared with surface water metrics and sustainable yields. For each aquifer, we may find out we are right at sustainable yield, above the sustainable yield, or below what the sustainable yield could be. Preliminary results have some aquifers looking like the latter, with groundwater use below the sustainable yield. Dr. Kennedy says he has received results from EPD’s contractors Friday, and is currently processing the results. He expects the groundwater resource assessment be available in mid-December. 1. Chairman Cross noted that from a standpoint of available resources, it seems some aquifers have a little bit of surplus. It is reassuring to a degree that we are not in a drastic situation with groundwater supply today. (Correct, it does not appear we are going in that direction.) 2. Robert Jenkins asked if this is for this year or in the past. (These are model simulations for drought years, 2007 in some cases, simulate 1999 in others depending on data availability.) 3. Are other regions going to be interested in what we do in this region with groundwater? (There is less impact on groundwater withdrawals in your region and the coastal areas. The “gulf trough”, located from southwest Georgia through Effingham County to South Carolina, acts as a hydraulic barrier keeping the cone of depression from moving further northwest. The Cretaceous aquifer system is deep, not used as a source of groundwater in Georgia, but used in South Carolina where it is shallower, but needs to be chilled and treated as the groundwater is hot (90 to 100° F) and salty.) 4. Robert Jenkins asked what would cause change, certain number irrigation wells per year, plants, etc? (This is what we are working on now, still trying to figure out with modeling results.) Bruce Azevedo suggested the water councils develop a strategic plan to locate businesses and talk to the Governor’s office, where the natural resources can accommodate growth and not rely on interbasin transfer.   8    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   (7) Management Practices Bill Martello presented an update on management practices, covering management practices for water quantity and water quality. He also discussed an example using economical and non-economical evaluation criteria in a ranking system for a utility examining long-term wastewater treatment and disposal options. Next steps include identifying gap, looking at alternatives, and having resource assessment models available in January 2010. Initial selection and refinement of management practices will take place in council meetings 5 through 7; the selection of management practices will be finalized by the end of next year, in December 2010. (8) Demand Forecast Update Bill Martello presented a demand forecast update, including status of the municipal demand forecast, preliminary industrial demand, and energy/thermal forecast update. Status of Municipal Demand Forecast EPD held two ad-hoc meetings to solicit input from council members and council’s expert representatives. Six representatives from Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Council attended the meeting on October 2, 2009. Out of 20 counties in the region, Bill has only received input from Hart County Water and Sewer Authority, Columbia County, and Madison County on the municipal demand forecasts. Per capita water use rates were revised for Columbia and Madison Counties based on the input received. For Hart County, additional data is needed from other water providers in the county (such as the Cities of Hartwell and Lavonia) to adjust the overall county per capita water rate. Bill proposes to augment what EPD sent out after the ad-hoc meeting to collect additional feedback from water providers in the region. JJG will be sending out a questionnaire and a form for regional input. 1. Charlie Newton asked what this information would be used for. (We need to have a good handle on base year per capita since it will be multiplied by future population to calculate future municipal water need. The per capita water use rate shown was calculated based on withdrawals and population data reported by USGS with the exceptions of changes we made based on input received. The acceptable range of municipal per capita rate for this study is 75 to 175 gpcd. The municipal demand includes residential, commercial and light industrial water demand. The per capita water use rate is determined based on withdrawals and not billing data so losses or non-revenue water use occurred during production or in the distribution system can be captured. Some utilities may consider a different base year than 2005. If you think water use was down in 2005 because it was a wet year, we can evaluate data from 2006 to determine the per capita rate.)    9    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   2. Larry Walker commented that lakes see a lot of seasonal and not permanent residences. (The transient population is taken into account in the region specific factors – second homes, tourists, university, etc. This will either be captured in the seasonal peaking factors or may result in a higher overall per capita water use rate. In evaluating water supply sources, we typically look at the annual average daily demand, not peak daily demand. However, we will be working with the resource assessments experts and will find out if peaking factors are needed for evaluation of critical conditions. Please let us know if your community experiences higher than typical peaking factors so we can take it into account.) 3. Charlie Newton commented that the 75 gpcd assumption for the self-supplied population seems about normal. (Agree for residential.) 4. Why does this include light industrial? Shouldn’t we separate out? (Most utilities’ billing systems do not break out single family, multi-family, light industrial or restaurants. Most can separate large water user accounts. Heavy or major water using industries will be accounted for in the industrial water use category. Industrial water demand, if supplied by public water systems, will be extracted and grouped into the “industrial” demand if data is available. We want to avoid double counting demand or not counting it at all.) 5. An expanded ad hoc group will reconvene and be given opportunity to provide input in early December. Development of preliminary municipal water forecasts will be January through February 2010 pending on the availability of revised population projections. 6. Chairman Cross asked where we are with the baseline assessments. (The results of the resource assessment will be presented in the joint meeting held January 19, 2009.) Preliminary Industrial Demand An Ad-hoc meeting was held with over 20 industry associations’ representatives by EPD on August 18, 2009 to solicit the industries’ input on the water forecasts. Two conference calls were held last week (November 5 and 6) to discuss the preliminary forecasts results with industry representatives. Bill Martello presented preliminary employment projections and industrial water forecasts based on these employment projections. 1. Bruce Azevedo asked about the effects on water usage using 2005 industrial data, some should be declining. (Dr. Dorfman of UGA received hundreds of comments for all regions and have incorporated the comments in the revised employment projections. Several industries (such as textile and mining) were predicted to be in decline. A decision was made that if the industry sector is in a declining trend, the   10    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   water supply capacity is kept in the community because the community may use it for attracting other industries.) 2. Larry Walker asked if the Forestry Commission has been consulted. The paper industry in the region has seen some decline as well. (The paper and pulp industry was consulted and provided forecast for their sector. We can share this information if the council is interested. If the council members have local information on an industry in your area, we would appreciate feedback.) 3. Thomas Jordan says he sees declining employment projections for stone/clay and mining. (Water use for the Kaolin industry was accounted for in the stone and clay category, not in mining. Overall mining is projected to be in decline for the planning period. A small growth is projected for stone and clay category over the 40-year planning period.) 4. Next steps include sharing information with the ad hoc group, receiving input from the industrial sectors, and refining forecasts before Council Meeting 5. 5. Larry Walker asked if these were permitted numbers or actual use numbers. (These numbers are based on actual use from self-supplied industries tracked by EPD. Those industries using public water are currently captured in municipal forecasts.) 6. Dan Fowler asked what percentage is being treated and put back in (return ratio)? (Wastewater return flows are being evaluated by the industrial ad hoc group.) Energy/Thermal forecasts Bill Martello presented an update on energy forecast. 1. It is important to talk about projecting future energy needs of the state. We don’t know how different uses are incorporated in calculations (i.e. a facility may produce power that is transmitted out of state vs. Georgia’s needs). 2. Braye Boardman asked how much energy will be produced when the two new reactors (at Plant Vogtle) come on line. (George Martin said that the nuclear portion of energy is at 19 percent. Once the two new units go online, this will increase by 2 percent to 21percent (megawatt output, percent total output).) (9) Demand Forecast & Management Practices Case Study Bill Martello presented a case study example with Athens-Clarke County. Three wastewater facilities need additional capacity and need to meet more stringent limits, two of which need to be replaced. Initially, nine options/management practices were developed, and a screening process narrowed it down to the top 3. Economic evaluation criteria and non-economic objectives were developed and the options were either scored as favorable, neutral, or   11    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   unfavorable in a ranking table. The economic evaluation criteria were balanced with the non-econ objectives, options were reviewed for consistency with long-term needs, and the staff selected the top ranked management practices. 1. Donald Dye said he could see how this is done on a municipal level, but how would this be done on a regional level? (Needs/supplies will be evaluated based on planning nodes, on a sub-basin basis. It would start conceptually and get more defined.) 2. Tom Wiedmeier asked at what point will the resource assessment data be shared with South Carolina? (This will be part of the resource assessment. Jeff Larson said SC has data for existing capacities and are working on forecasting. EPD plans to approach South Carolina for their forecasts.) 3. Bruce Azevedo commented that a lot of water is available within certain sub-basins, but is not being utilized. The federal government is not doing anything with these reservoirs because they were not built by them. 4. Tom McCall said that this council does not go further south than Screven County, how do you figure things out down to the coast? (This will be addressed during the joint meetings in January and subsequent joint meetings.) (10)  Public Comment/ Elected Officials Comment  There was no public and elected official comment. (11)  Joint Meetings Discussion/ /Council Meeting Evaluation/Next Meeting Date  Bill Martello discussed the purposes and dates for joint meetings to discuss results of resource assessments. Volunteers for the January joint meetings include: •  Tuesday, January 19, 2010 in Augusta – to be attended by Chairman Cross, Tom Wiedmeier, Braye Boardman, Pat Goran, Mike Eskew, Barry Cronic, Stan Sheppard, Tim McGill, Bruce Azevedo, Robert Jenkins, Thomas Jordan  •  Friday, January 22, 2010 in Macon – to be attended by Chairman Cross, Jerry Boling, Dan Fowler, Larry Guest, Charlie Newton, Lewis Sanders, Tom Wiedmeier.  •  Monday, January 25, 2010 in Carrollton or Dawsonville – to be attended by Chairman Cross, Larry Walker, Jerry Boling, Donald Dye, Dan Fowler  Council Meeting 5 will be between March 15 and March 25. March Meeting Location: Tom McCall will check if Elberton is available and will follow up. Mike Eskew distributed an attachment from the Southeastern Power Association (SEPA). He noted that of the $172 million dollars SEPA puts in Lake Thurmond, 2.68% is for Navigation.   12    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   Meeting was adjourned at 2:00 PM.  (12)  Summary of Action Items •  Planning contractor to distribute information for the Governor’s Task Force website/contact e-mail.  •  Planning contractor to distribute municipal demand forecast questionnaire.  Meeting Attendees Council Members in Attendance Ron Cross, Chair  Charlie Newton, Vice-Chair  Bruce Azevedo  Braye Boardman  Jerry Boling  Charles Cawthon  Barry Cronic  Don Dye  Mike Eskew  Dan Fowler  Pat Goran  Larry Guest  Toye Hill (alternate)  Robert Jenkins  Thomas Jordan  Michael Shaffer (for Scott MacGregor)  Tom McCall (Ex-Officio)  Chris McCorkle  George Martin (for Tim McGill)  Lewis Sanders  Stan Sheppard  Larry Walker  Tom Wiedmeier Council Members Not in Attendance Deke Copenhaver  Patricia Goodwin (alternate)  Ralph Hudgens (Ex-Officio)  Eddie Madden  James Newsome  R. Lee Webster  Tenia Workman Staff in Attendance Jeff Larson – EPD  Dr. Jim Kennedy – EPD    13    Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #4 November 24, 2009   Bill Martello – JJG  Inga Kennedy – PEQ  Tai-Yi Su – JJG  Stephanie Gardner – AECOM  Partnering Agencies and General Public John Colberg – Georgia Forestry Commission Deatre Denion – Department of Community Affairs Robert Amos – Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission George Dwehring – Columbia County Development Authority Dennis Black – Georgia Farm Bureau Taj Smith – Georgia Farm Bureau Frank Carl – Savannah Riverkeeper Amanda Wrona Meadows – The Nature Conservancy (Savannah) Carolyn Pait – Oglethorpe Power Corporation Robert Fields – City of Harlem Nancy Bobbitt – US Senator Isakson Sam Booker – Member of the Public Attachments – Public Comments Attachment A Proposed Resolution, November 10, 2009 Attachment B Page 11 of the 2008 Southeastern Power Association (SEPA) Annual Report    14     owner 8 58 15 24 10 109 2 327 0 EST NA Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan 20091124_SUO_CM4_Mtng_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 