B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.4 September 20, 2010  To:  Lower Flint Water Planning Council  From:  Kristin Rowles, Black & Veatch and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch  cc:  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD  Subject:  Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 7 on September 13, 2010  The council meeting was held on September 13, 2010, in the city of Thomasville. The list of attendees is attached. In addition to these minutes, all the presentations (slides) discussed in this meeting are posted on the Lower Flint web portal (http://www.flintochlockonee.org/). The public sign-in sheet is included as an attachment. Welcome, Introductions, and Chairman’s Discussion Council Chair Richard Royal welcomed members and thanked everyone for attending. John Bridges provided the invocation. Council member Steve Sykes welcomed the council to Thomasville. Chairman Royal recognized the committees and thanked the members for their dedication. He also noted that the lateness of receiving data has been a challenge for the Council’s work. Next, Chairman Royal reviewed recent meetings related to the Water Council’s work: August 6th EPD Director, Allen Barnes, in Albany GA Royal said this meeting went well. He said it was focused on what the gap really means. He noted that we still do not have a good handle on the answer, but that it is his understanding that Director Barnes wants the Council to do the best it can to address the gap. Based on Barnes’ input, Royal said it is his understanding that the Council does not need to close the gap to zero. September 3rd Joint Council Meeting for Chairs and Vice-Chairs Royal said that the Upper Flint and Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Councils seem to be on the same page. He said there is still some work to do with coming to agreement with the Middle Chattahoochee Council. He believes all are trying to be reasonable and said that they will continue to meet. Chairman Royal said he went to an Atlanta Chamber of Commerce meeting regarding interbasin transfers. He said he told the audience that the Flint Basin is already overallocated and therefore, water cannot be transferred from the Flint to Atlanta because  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  there was no water to give to them. He said that we have an open mind, but a water deficit. Royal said that he expressed concern about the timeframe for the regional water planning process and asked Senator Ross Tolleson (also present at the meeting) for the legislature to give the councils more time to complete the process. Royal suggested a six month extension. Senator Tolleson said this was not the first council to request more time. Council member Jimmy Web asked if we needed the legislature to vote on an extension and what the chances were for an extension. Senator Bulloch said he had also talked to Senator Tolleson and that he said there was a possibility of extending the deadline. He said that they might not need legislative action to change the deadline. Council ViceChair Hal Haddock commented that that there were still a lot of loose ends and that more time would help. Royal said that in the meeting with the other Council leaders, agriculture metering and reservoirs were discussed. There were many questions about reservoirs; Royal said he was not sure how realistic option this was. Haddock commented that interbasin transfers are a frequent topic of discussion now. Royal said it was important not to make any commitments and to do a lot of listening. With respect to interbasin transfer, Senator Bulloch commented that there are many interbasin transfers happening in the state and that instead of banning interbasin transfers, we have to take a statewide approach. In any transfer, the donating basin should get credit. Royal said that we should not lock down a position on interbasin transfer at this time and said it is possible that the Flint could benefit from an incoming interbasin transfer. Bulloch noted that a transfer from the Tennessee River might be an option for Metro Atlanta in the future. Royal said that Lake Blue Ridge, in the Tennessee Basin, is used only for recreational purposes. Next, Chairman Royal said they had quorum and asked for approval of the agenda. Council member John Bridges made a motion to approve. Council member Chuck Lingle seconded this motion. With no objections, the agenda was approved unanimously. Next, Chairman Royal asked for approval of the last council meeting summary. Council member T.E. Moye made a motion to approve, and Jimmy Webb seconded the motion. The Council approved the summary with no objections. Next, Chairman Royal asked Kristin to review the planning process schedule, which was distributed as a hand-out. Completion Date  Milestone  September 13, 2010  Council Meeting 7  September, 2010  Plan Review Committee Meeting  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  October 6, 2010  Joint Meeting in Macon  October, 2010  Plan Review Committee Meeting  October 15, 2010  Draft WDCP Sections 6, 7, 8 Delivered to GA EPD  November, 2010  Council Meeting 8  November, 2010  LFO Receives Water Quality Modeling Results  December, 2010  Plan Review Committee Meeting  January, 2011  Council Meeting 9  January 31, 2011  Recommended Plan to GA EPD  March, 2011  Plan Review Committee Meeting  March, 2011  Council Meeting 10  March-May, 2011  Public Notice of Draft Plan  June, 2011  Final Production of Adopted WDCP  June 30, 2011  GA EPD Approves LFO Regional WDCP  Chairman Royal said he is concerned that the timing of the October 6 joint meeting will make it difficult for farmers to attend. Kristin distributed a meeting announcement for the October 6 meeting and passed around a sign-up sheet for the meeting. Kristin noted that a draft of Sections 6-8 of the regional plan is due to GAEPD on October 15. She emphasized that this draft will be a chance for feedback from GAEPD, but that the plan will still be changeable after that interim deadline.  Review of Council Goals Council member Huddy Hudgens proposed a modification of one of the Council’s goals. He said he thought it was important that the goals recognize the importance of all of the region’s aquifers. Chairman Royal said this proposal is a good example of how we can change things as we go through this process. The existing goal reads: Sustain the region’s aquifers, most particularly the Floridan aquifer, in a healthy condition that will continue to support the natural systems and economic activities of the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region. The proposed goal reads:  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 4 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  Sustain the region's aquifers, the Floridan, the Tallahatta, the Clayton, and the Cretaceous, in a healthy condition that will continue to support the natural systems and economic activities of the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee region. Richard Royal said that Doug Wilson noted that the Tallahatta is more commonly known as the Claiborne. The council approved the proposed goal, modified as followed: Sustain the region's aquifers, the Floridan, the Claiborne, the Clayton, and the Cretaceous, in a healthy condition that will continue to support the natural systems and economic activities of the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee region.  Water Development and Conservation Plan Review Committee Report (Sections 1-5 Draft) Kristin Rowles reminded the Council that a draft of Sections 1-5 of the regional water plan had been submitted to GAEPD on August 16. She noted that these sections are the “background” sections that summarize work to date, including the Council’s vision and goals, results of the resource assessments, and water and wastewater forecasts. She stressed that this document was a draft document. Kristin said that we are still waiting for comments on the draft from GAEPD. Chairman Royal said that the draft was reviewed in detail by the Council’s Plan Review Committee. He suggested that Kristin review the document with the Council chapter by chapter, and Kristin did this. Huddy Hudgens commented that he did not see any information about water use by power companies. Kristin noted that we are still waiting on the results of the energy sector water use forecasts. Steve Simpson said this information is expected in September. Council member Jim Quinn made a motion that the Council approve this draft for posting on the Council website. Jimmy Webb seconded this motion, and it was passed unanimously. Again, it was emphasized in discussion that this draft document is still changeable. Water Quantity Committee Report and Management Practice Selection Recommendations Committee Chair Jimmy Webb presented the Water Quantity Committee report. He said that the committee has met multiple times (June 11, June 15, August 16). The committee reviewed model results from GAEPD, discussed management practice selection, and developed recommendations to the Council for today’s meeting. Webb presented the model results from the Montezuma and Bainbridge nodes as shown below.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  MONTEZUMA  BAINBRIDGE  Storage needed to offset Bainbridge shortfall: 162,223 acre-feet  Page 5 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 6 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  Webb commented that the Council needs to be making an effort to close the gap. Council Chair Royal commented we need better quantitative information on conservation practices already in place in the region. Webb reviewed some of the management practices discussed. He said that in some cases we might be able to convert surface withdrawals to groundwater use. He said that the committee thought irrigation cessation should be off the table. Chairman Royal said that the Council should be able to consider the potential benefit of Army Corps of Engineers reservoirs on the Chattahoochee side of the system. Webb commented that relative value of water for recreation versus agriculture should be considered. Council member Huddy Hudgens said we need to reevaluate the use of 7Q10 as the metric. He believes it is too restrictive. Webb reminded the Council that it has considered alternatives and found there to be no defensible alternative at this time. Hudgens also expressed concern about assumptions regarding pumping for upstream reservoirs. Chairman Royal commented that he had discussed using available storage in the Griffin reservoir to support Flint flows with Mayor Dick Morrow. Royal said Griffin is open to discussion but unlikely to provide this benefit for free. Next, Kristin reviewed the water quantity management practices strawman, which is included in the pre-meeting packet. Council member Rick Moss asked about the benchmark for agricultural irrigation efficiency. He asked how many farmers already met the 80% or greater efficiency target. Webb said we believe that at least half of the region’s farmers are already at this level, but noted that a better estimate of the baseline level of implementation is needed. Council member Steve Sykes asked if this benchmark will make any new equipment obsolete. Council member Jimmy Webb said no. New irrigation equipment meets this benchmark. In discussion, it was noted that traveler systems would not meet this benchmark. Council Member T.E. Moye asked about evaporation with water storage in farm ponds. Kristin said that the committee had discussed this concern, but still recommended their use. She asked if they would like to reconsider, but the Council did not wish to change the recommendation at this time. Kristin said that the committee had indicated that the selected practices were to apply regionwide in all watersheds in the region (Flint, Ochlockonee, Chattahoochee, Suwannee).  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 7 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  Jimmy Webb made a motion that the Council approve the draft recommendations in the strawman prepared by the Committee for inclusion in the October draft regional water plan. Jimmy Champion seconded this motion, and it passed unanimously. Again, it was emphasized in discussion that these recommendations and the October 15 draft are not final and can still be changed. Kristin told the Council that the format of the recommendations would change somewhat as they were compiled with the Water Quality recommendations in the draft plan, but this substance of the recommendations would not change. She also noted that some of the background discussion in the strawman was there to support committee and council discussions, but that it would need to be edited from the document to meet overall page limit target.  Review of ACF Flow Data Council Chair Richard Royal said that at the last council meeting he had asked Woody Hicks from the Jones Ecological Research Center to review pre and post impoundment flows in the ACF for the Council. Hicks presented slides that reviewed historical flow data. The slides are available on the Council website. There were no questions for Hicks.  Clean Water Act 319(h) Grant Opportunities Steve Simpson said through the Section 319(h) Grant program, there is a funding set aside of approximately $1 million for council recommended projects. This funding will be divided among the ten regional councils. There is a 40% match requirement for funding from the entity administering the project. Funding can be used for projects such as stormwater controls and stream restoration. The Water Quality Committee will be reviewing this opportunity.  Water Quality Committee Report and Management Practice Selection Recommendations Water Quality Committee Chair Jerry Lee presented the committee’s strawman document of recommended management practices. He noted the challenge presented by the absence of some of the modeling results (forthcoming in November 2010). The committee has done the best that the can with available information, and revisions will be made as needed as information becomes available. He said that the committee has reviewed material from GAEPD and gathered additional information from the Forestry Commission. The committee met on July 15 and August 12. The strawman is included in the pre-meeting packet. In summary, the document includes the following:  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010 – – – – –  –  – – –  Page 8 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  Existing practices and programs recognized Best Management Practices highlighted Additional water quality data needed Uncertainties recognized; adaptive management recommended Near-term  Support existing plans & practices and improved enforcement  Improved coordination and utilization of existing resources  Improve BMP implementation and documentation  Create and fund a stream buffer land acquisition program  Encourage improved stormwater management  Increased water quality monitoring & coordination Long-term  Improve application of coordinated state resources on water quality  Require regulation of phosphate concentrations in lawn fertilizer and detergents Increased State Funding for GA EPD Advocated Creation of a Program for Stream Buffer Land Acquisition Additional funding needs to be defined for long-term water quality management practices  T.E. Moye said he was concerned about the stream buffers recommendation. He said in his experience, the least government you have, the better. After some discussion on stream buffers, the council agreed to remove language advocating for the creation of a buffer land acquisition program. The Council next discussed requiring local communities to regulate phosphate levels in fertilizer and detergent. Senator Bulloch said the state Department of Agriculture has the sole authority to regulate fertilizer, and municipalities do not have this authority. Steve Sykes commented maybe the council could recommend responsible use of fertilizer. Chuck Lingle said that the idea is not to ban the use of phosphate completely, but if to limit its sale for agriculture uses only, in order to reduce phosphate. Jimmy Champion said phosphate is an essential element that should not eliminated without scientific evidence. Senator Bulloch said that for detergents, requirements should be set statewide, and he noted that even with statewide limits, there would still be some that comes in across state lines. A council member noted there were limits on phosphate purchase and application in Florida, and some farmers come to Georgia from Florida to buy fertilizer. There was a motion to delete the recommendation about requiring local communities to limit phosphate levels in fertilizer. Chairman Royal asked if there were any objectives. Steve Sykes noted that he objected. He thinks that the Council needs to educate citizens about this topic. Without consensus, Chairman Royal asked for a vote. The Council approved the motion with 10 in favor and 4 opposed. Jim Quinn made a motion that the council recommend that the state evaluate commercially available phosphate concentrations in laundry and other retail detergents. The motion was unanimously approved.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 9 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  Jerry Lee made a motion to adopt the strawman document for the October draft plan, as modified at today’s meeting. He noted that the Water Quality Committee will review the recommendations again upon receipt of the expected modeling results. The motion was approved unanimously. Water Development and Conservation Plan Section 6-8 Kristin described how the October draft would be developed. She said that the staff would take the strawman documents and combine them in the format outlined for the draft plan for Section 6. She said that the order and format of recommendations might change, but the substance would not. Kristin reviewed the Table of Contents for Sections 6, 7, and 8 of the regional plan. The Table of Contents is included in the pre-meeting packet. In addition to the strawman recommendations, these sections will include discussions of: fiscal implications, implementation responsibilities and schedules, recommendations to the state, alignment with other plans, and plan implementation benchmarks. Kristin said that the October draft would be circulated to the Water Quality, Water Quantity, and Plan Review Committees for comment prior to submission. If others would like to review the draft, they should let Kristin know. Chairman Royal asked when the Council will get comments on the August draft from GAEPD. Tim Cash said that the Council should have them this week. Next, Chairman Royal recognized Thomasville Mayor Camille Payne. Mayor Payne thanked everyone for attending and said she hoped everyone had a great time in the City of Thomasville. Next, Council member John Bridges gave a blessing before lunch. Endangered Species Act Presentation by Sandy Tucker, USFWS After lunch, Sandy Tucker, supervisor of the Georgia Ecological Services Office for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), gave a presentation to the Council about the Endangered Species Act (ESA). Tucker said that the law was enacted in 1973, and it is implemented by the USFWS and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Tucker explained how the various sections of the Act apply in the context of water planning. Her slides are available on the Council website.  Representative Hanner asked what would happen if one of these mussels went extinct. What would be the implications for society? Tucker responded that while not valued economically, these species are an indicator of the health of the ecosystem. She said that  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 10 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  their loss would indicate that flows in the system are so altered that the ecosystem is in trouble. Senator Bulloch asked how science enters into the listing process for the ESA. He said he wondered if for some of these mussels, perhaps there never were very many of them present historically. Tucker said that the listing process is a federal rule-making process that requires scientific documentation regarding species numbers, reproduction, and distribution over time. She said that historical information on species populations is included. The process includes a public review. Bill Yearta asked is some listed species are valued more than others. Tucker said that threatened vs. endangered is use as an indication of threat to the species and determines the level of protection. Mike Newberry asked if one species of mussel has decreased, will others decrease as well? Tucker said that it is likely that other mussel species that occur with that species are also in trouble. Bill Yearta asked how far mussels travel. Tucker said that you can see trails left in the sand near creeks as water levels decrease. Some mussels travel across the stream bottom, while others burrow straight down into the sediment. Tucker explained how mussels are labeled for tracking in the wild. Jimmy Webb asked whether not being able to find a labeled mussel indicates a taking. Tucker said no. Labeled individuals provide information, but are not used to indicate violations. Senator Bulloch asked if any species has come off the ESA list. Tucker said that no freshwater mussels have been de-listed, but other species have, such as the bald eagle and the American alligator. Tucker stated that mussels need fish and water to reproduce. She noted that ESA prohibits “taking” of endangered or threatened animals by killing, shooting, harming, injuring, or harassing. Federal agencies have to ensure that their actions do not jeopardize the continued existence of listed species or adversely modify critical habitat. Jeopardize is an important term under the Act; it means causing the listed species to go extinct sooner. To protect listed species, federal agencies consult with USFWS. Any exceptions to takings prohibition must be covered by a permit with USFWS. Permits require protective actions to counterbalance potentially adverse actions. Tucker provided examples of federal activities that could affect listed species, such as U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE) operation of reservoirs on the Chattahoochee River, federal funding for road building, and USDA FSA financial incentives and  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 11 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  programs. For each of these activities, the federal agency must consider the impact of its actions vis-à-vis ESA listed species. Tucker said that low water years are bad for ESA listed mussels in the region. She said that the Council’s plan will address listed species. She said that the plan could include drought contingencies that protect flows and allow for shared pain across users in drought years. She said that withdrawals permitted by GAEPD have made conditions worse in drought years. Tucker said that the ESA is a federal statute, but it is addressed at all of us. It gives us a responsibility to conserve species in trouble. The role of the USFWS is to try to strike a balance between people and listed species. Senator Bulloch said that in the tri-state litigation, Judge Magnuson’s recent decision says that Florida’s ESA claims are not valid. Tucker said that Florida’s argument was that the USFWS had not correctly assessed the potential for jeopardy when it considered COE operations of reservoirs on the Chattahoochee. The USFWS did not believe that the COE actions would result in jeopardy. The judge affirmed the USFWS decision. Senator Bulloch said that if COE reservoirs did not exist, downstream flows would be worse than they are now for listed species. Tucker said that many factors are involved. She said that while it is true that COE reservoirs help to provide flows, it is also clear that use has affected flows. If use were less, the impact on listed species might be less. Tucker said that the COE is consulting with USFWS in the update of the Chattahoochee operations manual. USFWS is asking the COE to try to mimic natural flows as much as possible. Discussions have focused on the ramping rates, which regulate the rate at which flow levels shift. USFWS has asked COE to slow ramping rates to allow for time for spawning Gulf sturgeon (ESA listed) to respond. Tucker said that we do not have scientific information that calls for a specific flow for listed species, but we do know there is a range of flows needed over time to sustain the species. Jimmy Webb asked how the ESA affects him as an individual farmer. Tucker said if you are farmer drawing groundwater, your well is probably tightly connected to flows in the creek. If the creek has listed mussels, then the ESA requires that you consider how you can adjust your activity to prevent reducing flows that mussels need. If there is a clear connection between mussel loss and an individual’s activities, then a taking claim could be pursued. She provided an example of where a county in Florida had changed its lighting plans based on the needs of endangered sea turtles. Webb asked whether the USFWS had ever shut down a farmer’s use of water under the ESA. Tucker said no.  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 12 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  Senator Bulloch said that Webb has a permit that says he can pump water; is he in violation of the ESA? Tucker said yes; both the farmer and the permitting agency could be liable under the ESA. Tucker said that she has sent a letter to GAEPD saying that the agricultural water withdrawal permitting program is in peril of allowing too much water to be used in dry years and thereby providing inadequate flows for listed mussels. She noted that it is easier for her agency to focus on the permitting agency than on all the individual permittees. Senator Bulloch said that we have done a lot of conservation and water management in Southwest Georgia and that Florida has not and yet we are all drawing from the same aquifers and river basins. Tucker noted that the agency has USFWS people in Florida working on these species. Jimmy Webb asked why the Council had not heard about the letter from USFWS to GAEPD given the letter’s relevance to the planning process. Tim Cash said that the letter was from 2006. It is a part of the public record. The letter is addressed to the GAEPD Director and concerns the adoption of the Flint Plan. Cash noted that he had only recently been made aware of the letter. Tucker said that organizational changes had occurred in GAEPD since the letter had been sent. Mike Newberry said that if the USFWS said there an ESA problem here, then GAEPD would need to take action to address the problem. Cash noted that this was the impetus for the 2006 Flint Plan. Chairman Royal thanked Tucker for her presentation.  Groundwater Sustainable Yields Update Kristin reviewed the groundwater sustainable yield updates from GAEPD. A hand-out of the results was distributed, and the slides are available on the Council website. Kristin reviewed the prioritized aquifers map, the sustainable yield modeling metrics, and the model results for the prioritized aquifers. The sustainable yield results were compared to groundwater use estimates. Kristin said that the updated results do not change the sustainable yield estimates, but the use information that is compared to the sustainable yields has been updated. The prior use estimates have been updated with the Hook estimates of agricultural water use, and these estimates substantially increased the use estimates in this region. The Council discussed the Dougherty Plain results in detail. The updated results show that the growing season average use of groundwater is above the sustainable yield for this  MEETING SUMMARY Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  Page 13 B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  aquifer in a median year and a dry year. Kristin stressed that the metric that defined sustainable yield for this aquifer is the metric that measures the impact of groundwater withdrawals on surface water flows. Modeling results indicate that groundwater drawdown in this aquifer, as caused by groundwater use, is very limited. The modeling results therefore reflect similar findings to the surface water availability results already considered by the Council: groundwater withdrawals impact surface water flows in the region. Senator Bulloch questioned the validity of the results. He and other Council members noted that the aquifer levels are healthy. Kristin noted that the results indicate impact on surface water flows. She said that the planning consultants requested another model run that focused on other aquifer metrics to get a better sense of aquifer health. GAEPD said that this model run would not be done. Chairman Royal asked Woody Hicks to comment on the results. Hicks said that it was difficult to assess. Only the synopsis report is available, and it is unclear when the full report will be made available for review. Bill Morris (GAEPD) said that the Council could meet with USGS to discuss the Dougherty Plain model. Steve Simpson noted that GAEPD is not planning to re-calibrate the model for this aquifer because it is a USGS model. Chairman Royal asked for the planning consultant’s recommendations. Steve Simpson said that the results add the information we have, but he asked whether it changes the recommendations for management practices. He does not believe it does. He recommended concentrating on management practice selection. Tim Cash (GAEPD) commented that the groundwater sustainable yields would be revisited in the plan’s next iteration. Given the concerns of Council members about the accuracy of the results and the completeness of the modeling process, Chairman Royal asked if the Council should ignore these results for now, and Tim Cash indicated that this was acceptable.  Wrap-Up and What to Expect Next Meeting Chairman Royal said that the Council requests from GAEPD a copy of the USFWS correspondence with GAEPD discussed during Sandy Tucker’s presentation. The next Council meeting will be November 8 in Sylvester. In the interim, there will be committee meetings and the development of the October draft plan. Kristin distributed an evaluation form and asked the members to complete the form before leaving.  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 14  Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 7 Meeting Date: September 13, 2010  B&V Project 164139 September 20, 2010  Attachment 1: Lower Flint Ochlockonee Water Planning Council Council Meeting Attendance – September 13, 2010 Council Members Steve Bailey John Bridges John Bulloch (Ex-Officio) Jimmy Champion Bob Hanner Hal Haddock (Vice Chair) John Heath Huddy Hudgens Jerry Lee Chuck Lingle George McIntosh  T.E. Moye Rick Moss Mike Newberry Jim Quinn Richard Royal (Chair) Steve Singletary Howard Small Steve Sykes Jimmy Webb Bill Yearta  Council Members Not In Attendance Steve Bailey Dean Burke Jerry Chapman Terry Clark Josh Herring Chris Hobby  Gary Leddon George McIntosh Doyle Medders Greg Murray Will Vereen  Planning Consultants Robert Osborne, B&V Kristin Rowles, GWPPC Mark Masters, GWPPC  Steve Simpson, B&V Doug Wilson, GWPPC  Georgia EPD Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief Bill Morris Mary Gataway  Georgia State Agencies Luke Crosson, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Service Bert Earley, GA Forestry Commission Jon West, GA DCA   Robert Osborne 3 52 14 30 8 110 4 272 1 EDT NA MEETING MINUTES 20100913_LFO_CM7_MEETING_Summary_000.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 9.1 for Word 