B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.4 April 19, 2011  To:  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  From:  Jim Hawkins, Robert Osborne, and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch  cc:  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD  Subject:  Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 10 on April 13, 2011  The council meeting was held on April 13, 2011 at the Bartlett’s Ferry Dam Clubhouse (Lake Harding). The list of attendees is follows (Attachment 1). In addition to these minutes, the presentations (slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Middle Chattahoochee web portal (http://www.middlechattahoochee.org/). Welcome and Introductions Council Chair Matt Windom stated that a quorum was present and thanked everyone for attending. Chair Windom said he was impressed with the council member turnout. Chair Windom recognized the passing of council member Larry Clark with a moment of silence and then provided an invocation. After an introduction and safety message from Arnold Lindsay, Southern Company’s Plant Supervisor at Bartlett’s Ferry Dam, Windom allowed members of the public to introduce themselves. The public sign-in sheet is included as an attachment. Next, Windom asked if there were any comments for the last two Council meeting summaries. There were no comments and both summaries were approved by consensus. Next, Chair Windom said they needed to again have elections for chair and vice-chair. Council member Jeff Lukken nominated Matt Windom and Harry Lange for Chair and Vice-Chair, respectively. The Council approved this nomination by consensus. Windom thanked the Council. Chair Windom commented the Plan Review Committee had met since the last Council meeting so there were a few more items to vote on today. Chair Windom reviewed the Council objectives which were the following: 1) Chair and Work Group Reports 2) Consensus on the Draft Plan 3) Resolution to submit Draft Plan  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2011  Page 2 B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2011  Overview of Plan Revisions and Plan Review Committee Recommendations Council member Jeff Lukken asked Jim Hawkins to provide an update on the Committee’s recommendations. Jim said most comments were incorporated into the draft plan; however, there were a few more comments that were received and are summarized as a handout to the Council. Jim provided a brief overview of comments incorporated into the draft since the last Council meeting. Jim reviewed each of the eight items in the handout, beginning with the following Item 1: Item 1. page 3-14, insert the following additional impact: River Flow Impacts. In addition to Corp operations and the affects on river flow, the Council is concerned about upstream and regional consumptive use and flow returns to the river. Upstream interbasin transfers and increases in consumptive use reduce downstream flows and reduce the natural flows in the river. The Council encourages better stewardship through land use planning and permitting to maximize flow returns to the river. Furthermore, a more scientific understanding is needed for such uses as agricultural irrigation, wastewater land application, and septic systems in order to better quantify the water balance with truer representations of consumptive uses associated with these uses. Council member Ken Penuel asked if this item speaks to the upcoming ACF Master Water Control Manual update. Jim said yes and also mentioned that actually all of the points in Chapter 3 relate to the updated control manual. Council member Steve Davis asked if this language also addresses issues during times of drought. Jim said yes. There was no further discussion on this item. Next, Jim reviewed the following Item 2: Item 2. page 3-12, add the following to the first paragraph: Similarly, the relationships between water turbidity, water detention/velocity, water temperature, precedent weather/flow conditions, pH, growing season duration and algal growth require further study in West Point and Walter F. George lakes to establish a chlorophyll-a standard that is appropriate for these reservoirs. A chlorophyll-a standard of 25 micrograms/liter for Walter F. George Lake has been suggested as reflective of Southeastern Plains Ecoregion reservoirs (Raschke 1994, EPA 1999).  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2011  B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2011  Council member Steve Davis commented that there were inconsistencies with the chlorophyll-a modeling and we need more scientific study especially for different ecoregions. Next, Jim reviewed the following Item 3: Item 3. page 3-5, add the following to the second paragraph under Navigation: Navigation is important to the regional economy and must be maintained between Columbus and Apalachicola Bay. Ken Penuel commented that he had heard the locks will be potentially reduced to three times a day for maintenance and suggested we may need to address funding. Council member Paul Chappell thought this language implies funding. Jeff Lukken agreed they did not want to interject the Council into the ACOE business. Penuel agreed with Lukken. Jim reviewed the following Item 4: Item 4. page 6-4, Table 6-1, revise WW-2 as follows:  WW-2: Encourage studies to determine the appropriate water returns ratios for agricultural irrigation and wastewater land application and septic systems  The assumption of 100% consumptive use is believed to inadequately reflect the quantity and timeliness of water returns from agricultural irrigation and wastewater land application and septic systems. This exacerbates the magnitude and duration of gaps in the EPD resource assessments. The studies would be scaled to reflect appropriate geographic and physiographic provinces, since returns would be dependent on topography, soil, and climate differences.  There was no discussion on this item. Jim reviewed the following Item 5: Item 5. page 7-14, Section 7-4 Recommendations to the State, at the end of Recommendation 1, insert the following: The following modeling constraints are the beginning point for revisions to the Corps’ water control manual.  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2011  Page 4 B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2011  INSERT Table 5-1 showing the desire flows and lake levels Chair Windom commented that the language really tried to look at the entire basin and not just Middle Chattahoochee. Next, Jim reviewed the following Item 6: Item 6. page 7-16, revise the third recommendation to read as follows: 3. Metro North District Returns and Nutrient Loading The May 7, 2009 Metro North District Plan includes ambitious predictions of returns to the river for which the Middle Chattahoochee resource assessments now greatly depend. The Council would like a comprehensive audit of these predictions and ongoing measurement and regular reporting on the progress to achieving these goals. Furthermore, the Council desires that such progress be reported as a range of statistical flows, including mean, minimum, and maximum values of consumptive use. The Middle Chattahoochee Council is also concerned about the nutrient load increase projected for 2050 that is estimated at the Whitesburg gauge. Nutrient loadings of phosphorus and nitrogen are expected to increase 200 percent by 2050. The Middle Chattahoochee region should not be burdened with additional waste water treatment or storm water BMPs caused by increases in upstream discharges. Specific to nutrients, the Council is concerned about the increases in phosphorus and nitrogen and the resulting chlorophyll-a to West Point Lake and Lake Walter F. George and the potential for degradation of lake water quality. The Council requests that the Metro North District provide: 1) specific details of how the increased nutrient load will be mitigated before it reaches the Middle Chattahoochee basin, and 2) provide annual progress reports of nutrient levels and reduction effectiveness. Finally, the Council recommends a peer review of the lake and watershed models to better understand the methodology as it relates to the output and calibration. Pending the review, the council recommends that the model outputs not be utilized for setting water quality standards instream or for any other regulatory purposes, including point source permitting in the region.  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2011  Page 5 B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2011  Lukken asked the Council what we are asking EPD to do with this language. Lukken continued and asked if the Council wanted EPD to permit without modeling. Council member Steve Davis thought we were asking EPD to “holdup” on the modeling until the model is peer reviewed. Chair Windom said he felt many council members were uneasy about the model. Steve Simpson noted that these ideas about the model are reflected in different parts of the plan. After some more discussion, there was consensus to leave the text as suggested. Next, Jim reviewed the following Item’s 7 and 8: Item 7. page 8-6, insert the following text as follows: The Council recommends an increased awareness of water balance in the region and therefore, has requested that additional measurement and water return ratio studies be performed to better understand consumptive uses and related water returns. Once completed, this information will better equip the Council and region for managing consumptive uses and allow the Council’s vision of an abundant water supply for our descendants to be achieved. Item 8. pages 8-5 to 8-7, the following change will be made: Referring to EPD discussions with Black & Veatch about the draft plan Section 8-5 will be removed and will be incorporated into an Executive Summary that will be inserted at the beginning of the plan. There were no discussions on these items. However, a council member did ask if the Council needed to revise the census number to reflect the actual census numbers for 2010. Chair Windom thought this would not change the results much in the plan and was probably better to defer this change. There was no further discussion. Each of the items will be incorporated into the plan. Final Discussion of the Plan for Submittal to EPD and Plan Process/Timeline Chair Windom asked the Council members if they have any additional comments about the plan. Council member Aaron McWhorter said he was concerned that the plan did not discuss erosion control sufficiently. Council member Gordon Moss said the plan did discuss erosion control on page 6-7 of the plan. Lukken suggested they should have a system to address any council comments. Jim Hawkins said he or Steve Simpson would help Council Members with questions.  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2011  B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2011  Chair Windom asked the Council if there were any other final comments and told the Council there will be another chance to comment after the public comment period. Council member Paul Chappell asked what was the timeline for the Council going forward. Steve Simpson said this is a good question and reviewed the following milestone schedule with the Council: Completion Date  Milestone  April 13, 2011  Council Meeting 10  May 2, 2011  Recommended Plan to GA EPD  May-July 2011  Public Notice of Draft Plan  August 2011  Final Production of Adopted WDCP  September 30, 2011  GA EPD Approves the Middle Chattahoochee Regional WDCP  Council member Steve Davis asked the Council if they will meet again. Steve Simpson said they have talked with EPD about another September Council, but this is not confirmed. Resolution - Adoption of Plan for Submittal to EPD Chair Windom passed out a resolution (Attachment 2) and asked the Council to consider this resolution. Paul Chappell made a motion to adopt the plan for submittal to EPD. Jimmy Knight seconded this motion. Chair Windom asked the Council in a vote. The resolution to adopt the plan for submittal to EPD passed unanimously. Public comments Next, Chair Windom asked if there were any local elected officials or members of the public that would like to comment. There were no comments. Wrapup/Council Meeting 9 Evaluation Council member Alan Bell asked the Council if it true that Judge Magnuson’s ruling is being reversed. Several members said no. There is a potential that the ruling may be stayed, but there is no judgment yet. Next, Windom praised EPD. He said EPD honored its commitment to back away from the process and he appreciates that. Tim Cash said it was a fine plan and recognized the council members for their hard work. Finally, Chair Windom thanked the council members, Black & Veatch, and stakeholders. There were no additional comments and the meeting was adjourned.  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2011  B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2011  Attachment 1: Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting Attendance – April 13, 2011 Council Members Alan Bell Paul Chappell Steve Davis Philip Eidson Thomas Ellis Joe Griffith Jimmy Knight Harry Lange Jeff Lukken Aaron McWhorter Council Members Not In Attendance Jimmy Bradley Larry Dillard Gardiner Garrard Gerald Greene Bill Gregory Planning Consultants Jim Hawkins, B&V Steve Simpson, B&V Georgia EPD Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief Bill Morris Georgia State Agencies Patti Lanford, GA DNR – WRD Fisheries  Gordon Moss Ken Penuel Denny Rogers Jimmy Thompson Robert Watkins Don Watson Matt Windom Jim Woods Robie York  Bill Heath Joe Maltese Walter Rosso Randy Simpkins Brad Yates  Robert Osborne, B&V  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2010 Attachment 1 – cont’d Public Sign-in Sheet  B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2010  MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2010  B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2010  Attachment 2 Council Resolution A RESOLUTION BY COUNCIL CHAIR MATT WINDOM MIDDLE CHATTAHOOCHEE REGIONAL WATER PLANNING COUNCIL A RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING MATT WINDOM, COUNCIL CHAIR, AND HARRY LANGE, VICE-CHAIR, ON BEHALF OF THE MIDDLE CHATTAHOOCHEE REGIONAL WATER COUNCIL, TO SUBMIT THE COUNCIL’S RECOMMENDED STATE WATER PLAN TO ALAN BARNES, DIRECTOR OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DIVISION ON OR BEFORE MAY 2, 2011 FOR THE PURPOSE OF PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL IN ACCORDANCE THE JANUARY 8, 2008 GUIDANCE DOCUMENT TITLED, GEORGIA COMPRHENSIVE STATE-WIDE WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, ADOPTED BY THE COUNCIL IN IT’S 2009 MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT WITH THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DIVISION. WHEREAS, during its 2004 session, the General Assembly passed the “Comprehensive State-wide Water Management Planning Act” (O.C.G.A. §12-5-520) that declared the need for a comprehensive state-wide water management plan and set forth policies to guide regional water planning efforts; and WHEREAS, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-31, 12-5-96, and 12-5-522 call for the preparation of regional water development and conservation plans; and WHEREAS, the purpose of this plan, as stated by O.C.G.A. §12-5-522(a), is to guide Georgia in managing water resources in a sustainable manner to support the state’s economy, to protect public health and natural systems, and to enhance the quality of life for all citizens. The plan lays out statewide policies, management practices, and guidance for regional planning. The provisions of this plan are intended to guide river basin and aquifer management plans and regional water planning efforts statewide in a manner consistent with O.C.G.A. §§12-5-522 and 12-5-570 et seq.; and WHEREAS, the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and Speaker appointed members of the Middle Chattahoochee Regional Water Planning Council (the Council) and charged them with developing such a regional plan; and WHEREAS, the Council agreed in a 2009 Memorandum of Understanding between the Council and the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) to develop and submit a recommended regional State Water Plan to the EPD Director; and NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE MIDDLE CHATTAHOOCHEE REGIONAL WATER PLANNING COUNCIL, the Council Chair, Matt Windom and Vice Chair, Harry Lange, are hereby authorized to submit the Council’s draft recommended plan to the EPD Director on or before May 2, 2011 for the purpose of plan review and approval. BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, this plan represents the consensus approval of the Council as to the overall content of the plan.  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2010  Page 10 B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2010  BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, the plan is inclusive of attachment documents reference therein which include meeting minutes of all Council meetings, Joint Council meetings and Work Group meetings. Contained in these meeting minutes is a record the opinions, objections, requests and debate by Council members on specific issues of the plan. BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, the Council requests the Director to review the recommended plan and attachments thereto to determine if they are consistent with the rules for regional water planning and guidance adopted pursuant to those rules. BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, the Council requests that EPD solicit public comment on the draft plan. BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, the Council welcomes public comment to the draft plan and will endeavor to make any revisions as may improve upon the plan.   Robert Osborne 53 51 16 20 3 111 3 109 1 EDT NA  MEETING MINUTES  20110414_MCH_CM10_MEETING_SUMMARY_000.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 9.1 for Word 