

Memorandum  
To:  Altamaha Regional Water Planning Council   
From:  Rick Brown and Katherine Zitsch  
Date:  April 5, 2010  
Subject:  Council Meeting 5 Summary 

1)  Welcome and Introductions 

Chairman Brinson Lanier called the meeting to order and asked the Planning Contractor 
(PC) to start the day's proceedings. The PC welcomed the Council and mentioned that an 
official welcome from Plant Hatch would be in the afternoon when members went to the 
visitor center for the information and driving tour of the plant.  

The PC provided an overview of the agenda and meeting dates and location for the next 
Council meeting. Little Ocmulgee State Park was suggested and it was noted that the 
Council would revisit this at the end of the day.  

The PC then provided a brief summary of the last Council Meeting (CM 4). CM4 built on the 
resource assessment information presented at CM3. Council members and the PC reviewed 
municipal and industrial water and wastewater forecast methodology and status, continued 
the discussion of management practices, and discussed the Joint Meetings. The Council 
updated and adopted its Vision and Goals and adopted the Council's Public Involvement 
Plan. The PC then reviewed Council feedback from the meeting and the overall status of 
water plan effort and schedule. 

Following this discussion, the goals and objective of Council meeting 5 were outlined: 
T,  Review baseline municipal and industrial water and wastewater forecast results; 
T,  Review methodology and preliminary results of energy forecast; 
T,  Discuss results of current conditions Resource Assessment modeling as presented at 

Joint Meetings; 

T,  Discuss regional portfolio of management practices and management practice selection 

process; and  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 2 
 

T,   Understand how management practice selection ties back into demand forecasts and 

resource assessments.  

Next the PC handed out a draft table of contents (TOC) for use in developing the regional 
water plan document. The PC thanked Gerald DeWitt, Will Donaldson, and Paul Stravriotis 
for their efforts on the subcommittee to develop the draft TOC.  

The Chair and PC asked for subcommittee volunteers to work with the PC in developing 
preliminary plan sections. The following Council members volunteered: Ed Jeffords, John 
Roller, Sue Sammons, and Jim Strickland. 

A discussion was held regarding the need for outreach to key municipalities. The PC noted 
that if Council members have municipalities or water providers that are not included in the 
Council and should be included in outreach, they should provide municipality names and, 
as available, contact information. 

A summary was provided by the PC of the Governor's Water Contingency Planning Task 
Force. The Task Force completed their work in December 2009 and the final report is 
available online. The PC will email Council members a link to the final report. It is also 
available by going to www.georgia.gov and searching "Water Contingency Planning Task 
Force." The shortfall estimated for 2012 is 250 million gallons per day (mgd). Two portfolios 
were developed to address the shortfall: one for 2015 and one for 2020. Neither includes 
utilizing groundwater from south of the fall line. The 2015 Portfolio includes conservation, 
indirect potable reuse (252 MGD), and small groundwater supply systems (26 MGD). The 
2020 Portfolio includes: conservation, reservoirs - expansion and new (236 MGD), and small 
groundwater supply systems (26 MGD). 

Logistics for the afternoon tour of Plant Hatch were discussed. Members could attend the 
presentation at the visitor center and/or the driving tour of the plant. 

2)  Leadership Elections - Council Chair and Vice Chair - The PC noted that the Chair and 

Vice-Chair need to be elected every 6 months based on the operating procedures of the 
Altamaha Council. Ed Jeffords made a motion that the Council re-elect Brinson Lanier and 
Mike Polsky for Chair and Vice-Chair. The entire Council seconded the motion. The motion 
carried with no dissention. 

3)  Revised Municipal Water Use (GPCD) 

The PC mentioned that each Council member should have received a technical 
memo describing the municipal and industrial water and wastewater forecasting 
methods. Work was completed with a Council subcommittee on setting preliminary 
county level per capita water use rates in gallons per capita day (gpcd) for the  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 3 
 

region. These use rates were developed for public and self-supplied users. It was 
pointed out that this is the foundation to complete the water forecasting. Once the 
Council provides the green light that it agrees with the subcommittee 
recommendations, then the Council can move forward with forecasts and determine 
the amount of water needed and the management practices for future water 
needs/gaps. 

The self-supplied gallons per capita day (gpcd) rate was determined to be 75 gpcd (from the 
USGS Report: Water Use in Georgia for 2005). For public systems, the PC first completed a 
comparison between USGS gpcd data (by county) and weighted county gpcd derived from 
EPD data. The PC then conducted outreach to collect data from select individual municipal 
suppliers and to compare these data against the values originally reported by USGS and 
EPD. The PC also collected some EPD district office input as well as data from municipal 
providers, especially if the data were anomalous. If large industry was accounting for large 
gpcd, then that industry was taken out and accounted for in the industrial water use 
category. Smaller water using industry is included in the gpcd, however.  

The preliminary results from this work was summarized in a technical memo and provided 
to the Council ad hoc committee that participated in the refinement of gpcd (committee 
members included Gerald DeWitt, Jim Free, Ed Jeffords, Brinson Lanier, Mike Polsky, and 
John Roller). Refinement and outreach resulted in a more credible adjustment to gpcd 
values of four counties in the Altamaha region. The committee recommended to the Council 
to use the self-supplied water use rate of 75 gpcd and the individual gpcd for each county as 
refined by the PC. The range of gpcd for the Altamaha Region was presented and ranged 
from 95 - 195 gpcd.  

It was pointed out that no demand altering management practices were included in the 
baseline water demand gpcd other than passive/natural conservation resulting from the 
1992 Energy Policy Act. Moving forward, the Council should keep in mind that there will be 
natural/passive conservation as houses are remodeled and plumbing fixtures are replaced 
with lower flow water fixtures that were mandated by the Act.  

It was emphasized that forecasts are to be used in regional planning only; they are not for 
individual permitting decisions. This is a very important part of what the ad hoc committee 
talked about - "what are the unintended consequences of what we do?" These numbers 
should not be used for permit allocations, and this needs to be incorporated into the final 
state water plan. 

The PC then presented the results of the Governor's Office of Planning and Budget (OPB) 
population projections. OPB population forecasts are officially released. They are currently  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 4 
 

through 2030, but will be provided through 2050. The projections show the Altamaha region 
growing from 250,659 in 2010 to 374,565 in 2050. The next step in the forecasting process is 
to combine population and water use (gpcd) to forecast future needs.  

A discussion was then held on the gallon per capita day usages. The main data source for 
gpcd information is the USGS report previously presented. This report has statewide 
coverage, so it helps provide a common platform across the state. These data were collected 
from a large number of local water providers but are not intended to take the place of or be 
as detailed as some of the data that are collected/produced by local water utilities. We need 
to strike a balance between regional and local water planning. The regional plan will look at 
water use at a more regional level than what would be required for local water planning.  

Another source of data was the EPD drinking water system survey, which was self reported. 
This is a good data source, but not as reliable as the other two.  

As an example of what the PC completed, it was mentioned that Bleckley County originally 
had 39 gpcd from the USGS report. The PC conducted outreach and found out that the 
population served was inaccurate. The refined number was 115, which is within the region's 
range of 95 - 195 gpcd. 

The PC then highlighted a couple of points that were raised by the subcommittee. It was 
mentioned that the Council could adopt one single gpcd for the entire region. The strength 
of this is that it takes away some concern that the data might be used for an allocation in the 
future. The downside is that some of the counties may have a reason for a higher gpcd - 
such as more commercial or light industrial - and they expect that to continue moving 
forward. Or they may have a high rate of water loss and may need to implement a leak 
detection program.  The subcommittee agreed to have a county specific gpcd rather than a 
single value. 

Another option discussed was to have three different water use rates in the region (high, 
medium, low). The subcommittee did not reach agreement on this last point and wanted the 
full Council to consider this option. As planning contractor, we are recommending that we 
use county-based gpcds. The technical memorandum that you received shows data for all of 
the different individual providers. Again, we need to balance a regional approach with 
county level information. 

Chairman Lanier mentioned that the subcommittee looked at the fact that some of the 
Counties with higher water use rates have prison populations. That makes water use a little 
higher. In Candler County, the County spent about $2 million to upgrade the water system 
and spot leaks. Candler County went from 20% lost water down to 2%. The reason that our  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 5 
 

County's water use rate is low is also that we don't have a prison population, and we have 
efficient use of our water. 

The PC pointed out that's exactly why those numbers are important. There might be good 
reasons why the numbers are different between counties and there will be a range. 

A Council member pointed out that in Dodge County, there are three prisons, so that may 
elevate the water use rate some. 

The Chairman pointed out that the subcommittee found the water use rates to be 
fair/reasonable. The subcommittee leaned towards county specific rates, but the full 
Council needs to weigh in.  

The PC noted that water use rates were in 2005, which generally speaking looked like an 
average water year. 

It was pointed out that many individual homeowners have shallow wells for uses like lawn 
irrigation, and these water use rates are not included in any of these numbers. Shallow well 
usage may be more pronounced in this region than in other regions because here, we only 
have to go about 25' down to get to the surficial aquifer.  

It was further pointed out that the region's numbers are a fair bit higher than in metroAtlanta, but metro-Atlanta values were residential only, they did not include commercial. 

A Council member pointed out that Wayne County water use rates without the prison are 
lower. The prison uses over 300 gpcd based on County population.  

Kevin Farrell of EPD asked if there was any input to refine the percent population served? 
The PC mentioned that yes, the EPD database was used to get a sense for what might need 
changing. This happened in one to two cases in this region. 

A subcommittee member stated that he supported individual county rates because those 
factors that drive specific water use in that county are then used with population in that 
county. We don't lose the individual county factors. 

The PC noted that based on the population projections, it is looking like Georgia is almost 
doubling the population from 2010 (just over 10 million) to 2050 (just under 20 million). 
Growth is based on population, birth over deaths estimate (age, sex) and the amount of net 
migration into region.  

A Council member pointed out that unless the plan is to build more prisons in Wilcox 
County, they'll never meet that population increase. The PC noted that growth is modest for  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 6 
 

Wilcox County. The real question is for planning purposes, do you want to overestimate or 
underestimate growth? 

4)  Completed Baseline Scenario Municipal Forecasts 

The PC presented that it is expected that there will not be a major change in how water is 
generally used in the region and that past trends are likely to continue in the future. The PC 
presented information on percent self supplied versus publicly supplied in the region. It 
was noted that more urban counties have a higher percent of publicly supplied water. 

A Council member asked if self supplied includes agricultural water use. The PC responded 
that this does not include agricultural water use. 

The PC generated wastewater forecasts based on water use and percent sewered and 
percent septic. A centralized wastewater number is important because these become 
wastewater discharges and feed assimilative capacity models. Our subcommittee chose to 
use historic trends for percent septic and percent centralized wastewater and did not 
recommend altering these percents going into the future.  

The PC performed additional quality assurance/quality control on the land application 
system databases. LAS information often didn't have discharge data associated with them, 
which made it difficult to determine percentages.  

A Council member asked whether, as technology changes on discharge treatment, we will 
account for this? The PC mentioned that projections don't look at changes in technology 
moving forward. When we look at management practices, we may look at the need for 
improvement at some of the plants. Point source and land application forecasts take current 
trends into the future. 

Chairman Lanier reminded the Council that this will be a statewide water plan and waste 
disposal plan. In his visit with the new EPD director, the director stressed that this is living 
document that will be changed as facts change. The presentation made by the PC this 
morning is based on the best available facts that we have today and sound reasoning. 
Because this is a living document, we can change later if further information arises. We need 
to put our stamp of approval on self supplied water use of 75 gallons per capita per day of 
water. Further, county specific gpcd seems to be the best way to go. Our Council should 
approve or disprove this approach.  

Jim Free made a motion to approve the 75 gallons per capita day self-supplied water use 
and the individual county gpcds. Ed Jeffords seconded the motion. Chairman Lanier asked 
if there was further discussion.  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 7 
 

A Council member asked about the difference between 75 gpcd and whatever is used in 
these counties. The PC noted that the 75 self-supplied value (individual well user) is from a 
smaller data set because individual well users typically don't meter their water. In addition, 
there is no commercial or light industrial water use reflected in the self-supplied numbers 
whereas the county numbers have both of these uses. Finally, potentially more of that water 
is for indoor water use exclusively.  

A Council member asked if there was any double allocation. The PC noted that there was 
not. That's why we separated out self-supplied versus publicly supplied. The PC used the 
1990 census data to determine the number of people that lived outside of the service area, so 
they separated those people out from the public supply. 

A Council member asked if agricultural water use was separate. The PC noted that it is and 
that we'll talk after break about thermoelectric and agricultural water use and a little on 
industrial water use. 

A Council member noted that 75 gpcd has been around since the 1990s, so it is probably a 
high number now with conservation devices.  

Chairman Lanier called for a vote. The motion carried with no opposition.  
Chairman Lanier noted that the Council needs to approve the summary of Council meeting 
4. Sue Sammons motioned to approve the summary of Council Meeting 4. Dan McCranie 
seconded the motion. The motion carried with no opposition. 

Chairman Lanier also noted that the Council needs to approve the agenda for this meeting. 
James Mark Burns seconded. The motion carried with no opposition. 

5)  Completed Baseline Scenario Industrial Forecasts 

The PC presented that the purpose of the industrial water needs forecast is to capture heavy 
water using industries. There is typically not a good relationship between production data 
and water use. There is typically a closer correlation between employment and water use. 
Forecasts don't take into account changes in technology, however. In working with 
industrial groups, employment was generally determined to be the best indicator of future 
growth. Specific adjustments can be made on case by case basis if there's a reason to do so. 
One thing to note is that if employment projections decrease, it was determined that we 
would hold the water use at the same level.  

The primary water use in this region is in the paper industry. There is also other industry, 
food manufacturing, and textiles. The source of water in this region is mainly the Floridan 
aquifer. The subcommittee discussed whether we need to account for industry that might  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 8 
 

come, but that is not currently anticipated. The subcommittee decided that they can't 
"crystal ball" that information. We did outreach for any industries that might relocate for 
the area, including outreach with industrial planning groups. It was hard to get solid 
information. A couple of other Councils have asked if we need to put in safety factor for 
unanticipated growth in industrial water demands. The Coastal Regional Water Planning 
Council hasn't made a determination on the matter. Suwannee-Satilla is looking at a fairly 
modest amount (5 mgd). The Council opted to not make adjustments to the industrial 
projections. 

6)  Energy Forecasting Methodology and Preliminary Results 

The PC presented that each energy type (coal, nuclear, etc.) has unique water needs. Energy 
water projections are expected in summer 2010. The PC noted that withdrawal amounts for 
energy are larger than what is consumed. The PC is working towards determining 
consumptive use by energy source. 

A Council member noted that Oglethorpe has a biomass site in Appling County where the 
cooling system was grey water municipal water. He mentioned that if that is not in the plan 
for this region, we need to include it. 

The PC presented the water use in the Altamaha Region. The Doctortown planning node 
shows everything upstream of the node - both withdrawals and discharges - not just what 
use is occurring near Doctortown. The PC noted that going forward the Council may need 
to talk to other Councils upstream and downstream. The PC anticipates subcommittee and 
joint meetings with other Councils to learn about what they're doing and their management 
practices. 

The energy forecasting work includes a power stakeholder group to provide input into the 
forecasts. This allows the power industry to provide representation into these forecasts. The 
energy forecasts may be more statewide forecasts than regional forecasts; the forecasts may 
not distribute those needs into a county watershed level but we will have to wait and see the 
final outcome.  

A Council member noted that upstream impacts affect us substantially. Folks above the 
Altamaha region have the feeling that Altamaha has plenty of water, so it doesn't matter 
how much water they take. The Altamaha Council ought to always be cognizant of that 
mindset.  

The Planning Contractor noted that this is why we need to highlight joint meetings. As we 
look at needs in the Altamaha Region, and vision and goals, they include concepts like 
maintaining fisheries. We hear the Council and want to avoid the discussion of allocation 
while allowing a discussion of what's important in terms of resources here.   

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 9 
 

The PC confirmed that the statewide 2005 numbers include hydroelectric and thermal.  

A Council member expressed an interest in efficiency in terms of energy source and 
production. 

It was noted that Macon's cooling is more dependent on water than some of the plants in 
other regions of the state. Some of this will be for discussed in upcoming meetings. 

7)  Update on Agricultural Forecast 

The PC noted that based on previous agricultural forecasting work, some water users did 
not feel their water uses were adequately captured. Therefore, EPD working with subthreshold water use sectors (less than 100,000 gallons/day) including livestock, dairy, 
poultry and nurseries. Some water use adjustments were made, especially based on nursery 
water use. These adjustments rippled through other agricultural forecasting, so this forecast 
is a few weeks away from being completed. 

Some of this information is at a smaller detail than what Dr. Hook presented earlier. 
Councils will decide whether sub-threshold agricultural water-use will be included in their 
plan. Green industry is being consulted to determine if trends need to be incorporated into 
golf course water use as well as nursery water use.  

The PC presented the next steps for the all water use forecasts. Demands will be distributed 
to the aquifer and surface water planning node. The agricultural water demands and 
forecasts will be completed, as well as the energy water use and consumption forecasts. The 
PC will utilize the water and wastewater forecasts and work with Councils to begin the 
management practices and resource assessment analysis.  

8)  Resource Assessment Results 

The PC presented an overview of the Resource Assessments (RAs) and mentioned that the 
joint meetings that were held around that state over the last month provided a detailed 
summary of the RAs. The PC noted that today's presentation will be more general and that 
summary information from the joint meetings and from the resource assessment synopsis 
documents are additional resources that Council members can review.  

The PC then highlighted the RA for surface water quantity. The PC described the river basin 
delineations and the key inputs for the resource assessment. Points discussed included: 

\Gamma   Delineation of planning and basin nodes 
\Gamma   Location of USGS gauges  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 10 
 

\Gamma   Definition of unimpaired flows and 7Q10 (the lowest 7 day flow that occurs 10 percent 

of the time) that are used to determine the "flow regime" 

The Council offered the following comments/questions: 
\Gamma   What does the cross section of the river look like? Can this be presented? Possibly, we 

can look into this.  

\Gamma   Please confirm whether the Lumber City, Mount Vernon, and Doctortown nodes utilize 

the 7Q10 as the flow regime. The Planning Contractor noted that this would be research. 
(Note post-meeting: No, this value is not the flow regime. This graphic was used to depict the 
flow under varying conditions to provide the Council a sense of the flow variation. These nodes 
are semi-regulated nodes and flow regimes are determined from applicable existing instream flow 
requirements, including minimum reservoir releases and/or downstream flow operational 
requirements of FERC licenses or water control plans. In the absence of such requirements at any 
node, there is no required flow regime.) 

\Gamma   Does the health of the river depend on cycles? Yes for some functions. Is it the same for 

every river? No. 

\Gamma   Can we show unimpaired, observed, and 7Q10 on the same graphs? We will work on 

different means of showing flows. 

\Gamma   The Altamaha River is the net recipient of groundwater return flows in the lower river 

reach (i.e., 60 mgd at Rayonier)? A Council member said yes, but at Doctortown the 
ground water import is still only <1/2 of 1%. 

\Gamma   Do upstream withdrawals impact the areas in our region? Yes they can. 
\Gamma   What are the impacts of reuse? This can result in a decrease to downstream flows. 
\Gamma   We need to be careful how much is being withdrawn upstream. 
\Gamma   At Mt. Vernon, 7Q10 is only protecting for drought conditions. It may be important to 

include consideration of emergent drought conditions. What is the absolute floor or 
minimum acceptable flow? This is something that the Council can discuss - utilizing a 
minimum flow that is higher than what EPD is presenting. 

\Gamma   At which meeting should we identify demand quantities? By mid-summer. 
\Gamma   We need to make sure we also protect assimilative capacity and what is needed to 

ensure that protection.  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 11 
 

\Gamma   For simulated streamflow, does that include human effects? It simply means it is 

modeled flow. 

\Gamma   Why is the Canoochee at Claxton going dry? Could be existing withdrawals and/or the 

effects of drought. Some streams and tributaries naturally go dry in the summer. 

\Gamma   Where is the Claxton Gauge located? Not sure of the exact location. 
\Gamma   Would surface storage be considered for management practices? Yes. Council can 

suggest this. 

\Gamma   If the level is below the 7Q10, do we need to address this situation? Yes, possibly 

depending on causes and needs. 

\Gamma   Is the flow in Claxton dependent on other imports? There is one wastewater discharge 

from Twin City. 

The PC presented the water quality RA outlining the following points. 
\Gamma   Locations of dissolved oxygen (DO) and nutrient modeling were presented--smaller 

streams and tributaries were not modeled. 

\Gamma   The "naturally low" DO policy assumes low flow and high temperatures as worst case 
\Gamma   There are areas where there is good assimilative capacity and areas of limited or no 

assimilative capacity as shown on the RA maps 

\Gamma   TMDL listed segments for the region will need to be considered during management 

practice development 

The Council offered the following comments/questions: 
\Gamma   Where are the fishing and non-fishing areas? This is included in the Water Resource 

Overview presented at an earlier council meeting. 

\Gamma   For regions outside of Altamaha, what is the Council's role in regards to water quality 

concerns including areas outside the region (i.e., tributaries to the Satilla)? This is a joint 
meeting topic if Council wishes. 

\Gamma   Do we have charts for TMDLs for Oconee and Ocmulgee? Yes, we will get these to 

Council. 

\Gamma   Please provide more information on how streams get on the monitoring/TMDL list.  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 12 
 

\Gamma   It was noted that for RAs, DO and nutrients were modeled only if there were discharges 

to the reach. 

\Gamma   Is there a TMDL for Ohoopee and TMDL implementation plans? Yes, we will get those 

to Council. 

The PC then described the groundwater RA showing the following: 
\Gamma   Aquifer layers 
\Gamma   Modeled aquifer boundaries 
\Gamma   Aquifer sustainable yield ranges for prioritized aquifers, including baseline current 

withdrawals 

The PC wrapped up the discussion describing the development of the synopsis documents 
which document the development of the RA tools and highlighted the comment period for 
the documents. 

Council had the following comments/questions: 
\Gamma   Are the two Floridan models connected? In the case of the Floridan, it is one aquifer but 

two different models were developed. 

\Gamma   For RA models, have permitted values been input into the models? Not yet, but they 

will be for municipal and industrial uses for surface water models. 

\Gamma   What assumption was made on the distance between wells? Not sure; we will check 

that. 

\Gamma   What is the 30-foot metric? It is related to the cone of depression between two wells 

having more than a 30-foot vertical differential. 

The PC then asked the Council and chair to consider forming a subcommittee to begin 
looking at the development of management practices. The following Council members 
offered to serve on the subcommittee: Gerald DeWitt, Len Hauss, Paul Stravriotis, Mike 
Polsky, and Brinson Lanier. 

9)  Management Practices 

The PC defined a management practice as anything that helps us meet our regional goals 
and vision and that can be used to address future water resource needs. The level of detail 
for management practices within the regional plan can be different - some areas where we  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 13 
 

can get very specific and other areas where we will be more general. Management practices 
will be unique to the Altamaha region and the nature of the gap/future need.  

This is a holistic planning process - there are interactions between stormwater, water supply 
and wastewater. Reuse has an impact on water supply and wastewater returns - what is 
positive for some areas may be negative for other areas. We are looking at both point 
sources and non-point sources. 

Management practices need to be meaningful and be capable of being used as inputs to the 
resource assessment tools. For instance, the surface water availability management practices 
should be related to local drainage areas so that we can determine what the influence is at 
that node.  

The plan is to do surface water quantity management practices first and then surface water 
quality management practices.   

Water quality modeling is reach driven rather than water planning node driven. We will 
need to evaluate how this moves forward. Point source management practices could be 
reuse, centralized wastewater treatment systems, direct discharges, or land application 
systems.  

The next challenge that the Council will have is "how do we select these management 
practices?" As part of that process we don't want to lose sight of the Altamaha Region's 
Vision and Goals.  

We need to be open minded to list management practices and then be level headed when 
evaluating management practices. In addition, we need a decision making process to 
evaluate management practices so that we're not bickering. Options for decision making 
could include simple qualitative modeling, more complex records that utilize criteria, 
performance measures, and scoring of management practices. We could also have simple 
voting. We need to have a decision making process, but the type of decision making process 
is up to Council. 

From what we're hearing so far, we may be documenting some issues and deal with spacing 
issues on where wells are drilled, but for the most part we hope we're in okay shape on 
groundwater quantity. As a Council, we don't actually implement water projects, but we 
hope to provide policy on what's important to the region, working with local governments 
and utilities. We may need help from the Council to do some outreach and talk to providers 
about the planning process.  Meeting future needs will involve several key steps including: 
documenting existing uses, documenting remaining permit capacity, identification of plans 
that are currently being considered, and identification of Council specific ideas.   

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 14 
 

For TMDL areas, at a minimum Council will need to be familiar with the TMDL plans and 
their implementation status. Council is encouraged to do more if possible to help promote 
the implementation of some or all aspects of the plans, focusing on partnerships and 
collaboration. 

The PC presented that there were several ways to move forward with the development of 
the preliminary portfolio of management practices. The entire Council could work through 
the process, we could use a Council subcommittee, or the PC could provide some ideas to 
start from. A Council member suggested that the PC should throw out some ideas and send 
out emails for people to comment upon. 

10) Local Elected Official Comments 

There were no local elected official comments. 
11) Public Comments 

There were no public comments. 
12) Wrap Up, What to Expect Next Meeting, Council Meeting Evaluation 

The next steps in the planning process include evaluation of near term gaps and future 
needs. Management practices will then be developed to address the gaps and needs. After 
Council Meeting 6, each Council has increased flexibility on the schedule for meetings. This 
will allow Councils more freedom to work toward plan completion on a schedule that 
works best for them. Council meetings could move to more frequent meetings of shorter 
duration, could move to more sub-committee meetings, or could stay generally the same. 

The next meeting will be held on June 22nd at Little Ocmulgee State Park. 
13) Plant Hatch Presentation and Tour 

The meeting adjourned and interested Council members listened to a presentation about 
Plant Hatch and went on a driving tour of the plant. 

 
 
 
 
  

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 15 
 
Altamaha Regional Water Council Council Members Attendance List 

 

Altamaha Council Members  3/23/2010 

1  Gary Bell  X 
2  Randy Branch    
3  Guy Rex Bullock  X 
4  James Mark Burns  X 
5  Gerald A DeWitt  X 
6  Will Donaldson Jr.    
7  Cleve Edenfield  X 
8  Jim Free  X 
9  Randy Giddens  X 
10  Len Hauss  X 
11  Edward S Jeffords  X 
12  Phillip Jennings    
13  L. Brinson Lanier  X 
14  Dan McCranie  X 
15  Steve Meeks    
16  Greg Morris    
17  Buddy Pittman  X 
18  Michael A. Polsky  X 
19  John E. Roller  X 
20  Sue B. Sammons  X 
21  Doug Sharp  X 
22  Paul A. Stravriotis  X 
23  Jim E. Strickland  X 
24  Dent L. Temples    
25  Lindsay Thomas  X 
26  William G Tomberlin    
27  Michael Williams  X 
28  Tommie Williams    
29  Russ Yeomans  X 

Total  21   

Altamaha Council Meeting 5 
April 5, 2010 
Page 16 
 
Altamaha Regional Water Council Public Attendance List 

 

Public Attendee  3/23/2010  Representing 
1  Deatre Denion  X  GA DCA 
2  Barry Dotson  X    
3  Don Giles  X  Georgia Farm Bureau 
4 David  Eigendic  X  GSWCC 
5  Don Harrison  X  GA DNR - Fisheries Mgmt. 
6  Alison McGee  X  The Nature Conservancy 
7 Rahn  Milligan  X  GSWCC 
8  Ken Rosanski  X  Oglethorpe Power 
9  Bryan Snow  X  Georgia Forestry Comm. 

Total  9  

  edisondevakaramd 42 31 15 5 3 110 1 94 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - Altamaha Mtg Summary CM5_Webposting.doc ALT_CM5_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2 