

B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.2  

September 23, 2011 
  

  
To:   Lower  Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  
From:  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC, Robert Osborne and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch 
 cc:     Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD 
 Subject:   Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 11 on September 20, 2011 
  
The council meeting was held on September  20, 2011, at the Bridge House in Albany Georgia. The list of attendees is attached.   In addition to this summary, the presentation 
(slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Council's web portal (http://www.lowerflint.org/). 
 Welcome, Introductions and Chairman's Discussion 
 Chairman Richard Royal opened the meeti ng and thanked everyone for attending. 
Council member John Bridges led the group in an invocation.    
Council member Chuck Lingle commented that Richard Royal's remarks as a part of a panel on the regional water plans at the Geor gia Environmental conference in Savannah 
were excellent. Royal said he thought the panel went well. Royal said he tried to focus on major themes, such as the lack of trust in the models that hindered making far reaching 
decisions. Chairman Royal said he heard similar concerns from other council chairs.   
Next, Chairman Royal asked Council memb ers to think about Council member Bob Hanner who is recovering from heart surgery.  Royal introduced members of the public 
attending.  A list of attendees is an attachment to this meeting summary.  
Chairman Royal said he wanted to brief the Council on discussions he has had with USFWS, EPD, GWPPC, and ot hers about the endangered a nd threatened mussels in 
Spring Creek. He said that a group has been  meeting on about a monthly basis over the past several months.  The group includes Al len Barnes (Director, EPD), Sandy Tucker 
(USFWS), Sandy Abbott (USFWS), Gary Black (Agriculture Commissioner), and Kristin Rowles (GWPPC). Chairman Royal noted  that the GWPPC, including Doug Wilson, 
Mark Masters, and Kristin Rowles, has help ed support these discus sions and resulting efforts tremendously.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 Chairman Royal noted there are several studies that show a decline in mussel populations 

in Spring Creek. There is concern about potential  for a third party ESA lawsuit.  He said that the group has worked to pilot an augm entation effort in Spring Creek, and he asked 
Doug Wilson to report on that initiative.   
Wilson said that very low flows in Spring Creek this year led to an attempt to try provide for augmentation to improve habitat conditio ns in-stream by pumping water into the 
creek.  In July, efforts were made to work with irrigators to pump water to the creek, but it was decided that due to contractual difficulti es that two new wells would be drilled to 
provide for augmentation.  The City of Col quitt provided a site on city-owned land for the well. The Golden Triangle Resource  Conservation and Development Council 
provided $85k and the USFWS provided $35k  in funds to support the project. EPD provided well drilling equipment and personnel.   The project has required the efforts of a 
number of different people.  The effort ha s been permitted, and water quality has been tested. The first well (second well has been dr illed but the pump is  not yet operational) 
could start pumping later th is week. If the project pr oves successful, it may prove augmentation is a viable tool.   It is not expected that the pumping will be able to provide 
for significant flows, but it is hoped that  it can provide for some habitat improvement (mussel assemblage just north of the Col quitt wastewater treatment plant discharge) 
under dry conditions.  
Chairman Royal thanked Wilson.  Next, he ex plained that the group  is also working to develop an initiative to eval uate the potential for a Habita t Conservation Plan (HCP).  
Currently, the draft proposal is for a $433,000 pr oject. He noted that this project would affect everyone, and stakeholders would ha ve to buy in.  Chairman Royal noted there 
could be management practices that result fr om this plan, such as restrictions on irrigation. Royal reminded the Council members that this plan will require commitment 
from all stakeholders to develop  a solution. He said that he th inks it is best that if there are going to be difficult hurdles ahead that th e stakeholders have a say in how things 
proceed. Royal noted that he believes Alle n Barnes is a friend of the Council and agriculture, but, he knows that Barnes is hear ing complaints about agricultural water use 
this year.   
Council member Jimmy Webb asked if Barnes  understands the agriculture's economic impacts.  Royal said that he  does.  Webb noted the great im portance of agriculture to the 
regional economy.  Royal agreed,  but also noted that agriculture's voice in the legislature may be diminished in the future. 
 Howard Small said that some cities may have wells that are inadequate and not suffering 
from the effects caused by agricultural water  use. Council member Bill Yearta said that he has not heard anything about problems with  wells, but as mayor of Sylvester, he 
knows how important agriculture is.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 Next, Royal asked Kristin Rowl es to explain the HCP proj ect proposal.  Rowles noted 

that a HCP is a tool provided under the Enda ngered Species Act that can provide for some predictability and flexibil ity in implementation of the ESA.  Rowles explained that 
a HCP is an agreement between stakeholders  affecting an endangered species and the USFWS.  A HCP prescribes certain agreed  upon activities to support habitat mitigation 
and protection in exchange for a waiver of liability for "incidental" takes of listed species.  Rowles said that the proposed project has the following five components: 
  1.  Evaluate the feasibility of establishing a basin-wide HCP. 

2.  Develop a HCP Partnership to conduct outreach and develop participation by farmers and other stakeholders and from technical experts in a support and 

advisory role for this project. 3.  Assess baseline implementation of agricultural water conservation practices to 
support benefit calculation and prioritization for future conservation investments in the LFRB.  
4.  Establish stream flow criteria for federally protected freshwater mussel species. 
5.  Prepare a draft Habitat Conservation Plan (if determined to be feasible and beneficial)

.  

If the project goes forward, Rowles said that  some Council members are likely to be lead stakeholders in the project. She said this process will require commitment from the 
stakeholders. Rowles said they will be fine-tuning the proposal in the next few weeks and then looking for funding options. Gold en Triangle Resource Conservation and 
Development Council will be the lead organization for the project.    
Council member Howard Small asked if would be possible to build a small dam upstream of Colquitt to provide water for the musse ls. Royal said he had not heard of this 
possibility.  Rowles commented that many au gmentation and storage options, as well as conservation practices, would be  considered as a part of  the HCP project.  Council 
member Jimmy Webb noted that he feels that farmers are an endangered species.  
Last, Chairman Royal asked for the Council  members to adopt their previous meeting summary. The Meeting Summary was appro ved with no objections.  Chair Royal asked 
if any council member had any changes to today's meeting agenda.   The meeting agenda was approved with no objections. 
 Discussion of GA EPD Direction to the Councils 
 A letter with the EPD direction to the Counc il regarding agency review and completion 
of the plan is included in the pre-meeting  packet.  The primary comment from EPD was to include more information on conservation in the plan.   
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 Review of comments on plan 

 Rowles said that she would be reviewi ng comments on the plan from the state and 
regional agencies and from the public.  She sa id that the agency comments, primarily from EPD, start on page 13 of the plan. In  addition to EPD, the plan was reviewed by 
GEFA and the Southwest Georgia Regional Commission, but these agencies did not have any comments. The comments from EPD include the general comments in the letter 
included in the pre-meeting packet from Linda  McGregor, but also include more detailed comments from EPD reviewers, which are al so included in the pre-meeting packet 
(starting on page 13). Slides summarizing  the review of the agency comments are included on the council website. After considering the agency comments, the council 
would review and discuss the public comments on the plan.  
Section 6 - DM6  
EPD: On page 6-6, DM6, and subsequent references to DM6, the current wording of DM6 is not consistent with current state la w, which obligates the Director to require 
involuntary suspension of irriga tion under certain circumstances. Consider revising to read primarily through voluntary means or other wording that reflects the Council's intent 
but is consistent with state law.  
RECOMMENDATION: Suggest to  Council to move this mana gement practice to the Recommendations to the State section since  it is a recommendation for modification of 
current policy, which does allow for involunta ry suspension.  While implementation of the recommendation would not require a statut ory change, it does set preferences for how 
current law and policy are implemented (e.g., avoid involuntary suspension).  
After some discussion about whether to wait  until the end of the comments to approve, the council decided to approve each of the changes individually.  
 There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus. 
 Conservation 
 EPD comments are included in the pre-meeting packet on pages 16 & 17.  Rowles 
reviewed several points related to the EPD comments: 

\Gamma   Specific conservation practices are clearly  listed in the description column of Table 6-1 for Management Practices DM2, DM4, DM5, and DM7.   

\Gamma   The selection process, key points, calculations, and decisions are described in the Water Conservation Technical Memorandum (Supplemental Document 15).   
\Gamma   The Council states in DM5 on page 6- 5, "A focus on desired performance outcome will support increased conservati on while allowing farmers to select 

what practices will work best for their own operations."   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 

\Gamma   The DM5 description lists conservation pract ices that might be used to meet the stated conservation benchmark.   

\Gamma   This is the Council's preferred approach to conservation in agricultural water use.   
\Gamma   Page 1 of the Water Conservation Tec hnical Memorandum explains the heavy focus on agricultural uses. Table 1 shows  the current (2005) and forecast future 

(2050) water withdrawals in the region. Agriculture is the largest water use sector. Much of the Council's discussion focused  on this sector, but other sectors were 
also discussed, and management practices we re included in the plan to address all sectors. 
\Gamma   While the Council focused most heavily  on agricultural uses due to their predominance, it addresses conservation fo r non-farm uses (municipal, industrial, 

energy) in DM2 and DM3. Specific practi ces from the DNR Rules, State Water Plan, and Water Stewardship are cited in  the description column of Table 6-1 for 
these management practices. The plan also addresses the need for information on baseline implementation of these practices by non-farm uses in the 
Recommendations in Section 7.4. 
\Gamma   Cost information considered is given in Table 7-2.  Estimates are largely based on the Supplemental Guidance on costs, with several modifications and corrections 

made in discussions with the contractor that developed that document.  
\Gamma   It was not possible to estimate total costs  for many practices because the extent of current implementation is unknown.  The need for baseline implementation 

information is described in the plan, a nd the plan includes recommendations to address this information need.  The costs  of irrigation suspension are estimated in 
the Water Conservation Technical Memo (Supplemental Document 15). 
\Gamma   Calculating water savings for the practi ces listed in Table 6-1, DM2 and DM3, would be very rough estimates, give n the lack of available baseline 

implementation information.  Some would also be limited by the qualitative nature of the practices (e.g., submittal  of conservation plans by withdrawal 
permittees).  
RECOMMENDATION: Add the following to the Water Conservation Technical Memorandum in Section 2: 

Costs for demand management practic es and other types of management practices are estimated in Table 7-1 of the plan.  Cost estimates are for broad 
categories of practices, but allow for so me cost comparison.  The total costs of implementation were not possible to  estimate because of the lack of 
baseline implementation information.  The Council recommends the assessment of baseline implementation of conservation practices in Section 
7.4 of the plan.  Cost is an import ant factor in selecting management practices, but the Council did not use th is information to set a preference for 
one type of practice over another,  because the Council recognizes that all types of management practices will be needed in the region.   
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
  Furthermore, for agriculture, the  Council recognizes that costs for 

management practice implementati on can vary widely depending on location specific conditions, and therefore the Council recommends 
benchmark performance targets for ag ricultural water conservation rather than calling for the use of specific  practices.  Selec tion of the most 
appropriate, specific practices for agricu ltural water conservation is left to the farmer. 
 There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus. 
 RECOMMENDATION:  Add a new last paragr aph on page 1 on the Water Conservation 
Technical Memorandum as follows:  In Section 3, this memorandum calcula tes water savings to the extent 

possible for several conservation manageme nt practices listed  in Section 2.  Water savings estimates are focused on those areas where the best 
information to support estimates was av ailable.  However, the Council's plan includes management practices that address all water use sectors, and it 
addresses the need for better inform ation on baseline implementation of conservation practices and the effectiveness of those practices. 
 There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus. 
 RECOMMENDATION:  Add new water savings  estimates for selected non-farm water 
conservation practices to the Water Conservation Technical Memorandum.  
Steve Simpson explained that the B&V team  can add some estimates for water savings from specific municipal and industrial cons ervation practices included in the Water 
Stewardship Act.  The water savings from these practices will be small in this region.  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Section 3  
RECOMMENDATION: To address some of the pub lic comments, need to clarify in the notes to Figures 3-1 through  3-4 (page 3-2) and 4-1 and  4-2 (page 4-6) that demand 
estimates and forecasts are for the planning region, not to a specific watershed.  
Rowles said this modification would address mi sinterpretation of the water user charts in Sections 3 and 4.  The change is a clarification 
 There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus. 
 Executive Summary   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
  

EPD suggests: (1)  (not in packet) In the table titl ed "Resource Assessment Results - LFO 

Region", for Surface Water Quality under the column titled Summary of Model Results, it states that results  indicated decreasing availability of 
assimilative capacity in streams as disc harge flows increase.   It should be noted here that in certain segments  of the Flint watershed the model 
indicates that no assimilative capacity is left. (2)  In the column titled Counc il Plan to Address Re sults, suggest wording 
could be changed: "Collect more co mplete information to confirm model results and to support the targeting  of management practices for water 
quality in the future."  
RECOMMENDATION: Adopt these suggested changes.  
Council member Steve Bailey asked whether th e modification in item (1) should refer to the watershed or region.  Kristin said that  this is a good point a nd noted it should be 
region, not watershed.  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Section 3  
Several comments from EPD are included on pages 13 and 14 of the pre-meeting packet.    
RECOMMENDATION:  Adopt suggested changes. For page 3-11, modify the first paragraph as follows: 
  Figure 3-5 shows the  in-stream dissolved oxygen (DO) model results for 

current discharges given critical lo w flow (7Q10), high temperature conditions. Stream segments that we re predicted by the model to have 
exceeded the available assimilative capacity are shown in red.  Streams that are at the allowable DO leve ls are shown in pink, and  those predicted to 
have DO levels in excess of state water quality standards are shown in blue. Naturally low DO waters (below 5.0 mg/L  in the summer) are typically in 
the yellow to red range.  It is important to note that some streams are naturally low in DO, but  these streams cannot ne cessarily be discerned 
from in Figure 3-5 because the map indicates the effects of discharges as well as natural conditi ons for all streams.  Assimilative capacity appears to 
be available for stream reaches in  the region based on dissolved oxygen modeling results. The number of str eam miles where assimilative capacity 
was exceeded or unavailable under cu rrent conditions in the model was  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
  8.80 miles in the Flint River Basin (a s a whole) and 13.77 miles in the 

Ochlockonee River Basin.  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Section 4  
A comment from EPD regarding Section 4.4 is  included on page 15 of the pre-meeting packet.   
 RECOMMENDATION: Delete "for EPD by CDM,  Inc.", so that the 1st sentence of 
Section 4.4 reads: "Forecasts of water use  in thermoelectric power production were made for EPD by CDM, Inc.,  with the guidance of an advi sory panel that included power 
industry representatives and the Georgia Environmental Facilities Authority."  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Section 5  
Comments from EPD regarding Section 5 ar e included on pages 15 & 19 of the pre-meeting packet.   
 EPD: Page 5-7, Figure 5-1, in  the table that compares current and future assimilative 
capacity, the "at assimilative" and "exceeds as similative capacity" stream segments are added together so it appears things get worse  in the future.  In se veral 2050 models there 
is a decrease in segments that "exceed assimilative capacity." Recommend adding a column to the table to show "at" and "exceed"  as separate categories. Also note, the 2050 
model represented the scenario whereby all th e facilities had permit limits adjusted so as not to exceed the assimilative capacity of the  streams into which they discharged - which 
resulted in no red zones.  This was mentioned for the Ochlockonee but not for the Flint discussion (page 5-5). 
 RECOMMENDATION: Adopt suggested changes.   
 There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus. 
 EPD: Pages 5-1 & 5-2, Section 5 - Montezuma  is shown as having 0% of time below 
sustainability criteria. RA report says 0.01%  of time. Table 3-1 does say 0.01% of time, not 0. Also, table 5-1 has value and %, table  3-1 just has value with no use of "%" sign.  
Need to ensure consistency between the tables.  
RECOMMENDATION:  Use non-rounded numbers here. Change 0% to 0.01% in Tables 3-1 and 5-1. Add "%"O/symbols to  Table 3-1.  On page 5-1, 0%  is not stated; rather the  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 text reads that the sustainabi lity criteria were "met almost  100% of the time".  This is 

consistent with the EPD Tech Memo on the re source assessment results that read "The percentage of time when there is a flow shortage is almost 0%." 
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
EPD: Page 5-2, Section 5 - is the footnote 3 in  text and in footer  about Chattahoochee or Suwannee-Satilla? Both are mentioned in text and footer. Confusing wording? 
 RECOMMENDATION: Modify the wording of  the footnote as follows: "As noted in 
Section 3, small portions of the Lower Flin t-Ochlockonee Region occur in the Suwannee and Chattahoochee River Basins. Chatta hoochee resource assessment results are 
summarized in this plan.  Results for the Su wannee are not included in this plan, but can be found in the plan for the Suwannee-Sati lla Council. The Lower Flint-Ochlockonee 
Council..."  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
EPD: Page 5-4, 1st paragraph under Table 5-3, modify 1st sentence as follows: "As discussed in Section 3.2.2, in the Upper Fl oridan (Dougherty Plain), the sustainable 
yield results were determined based upon  the impact of groundwater withdrawals on groundwater contributions to stream baseflows,   surface water flows,  rather than on the 
condition of the aquifer itself.  
RECOMMENDATION:  Adopt suggested change.  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Section 7   
A comment from EPD is included on page 16 of the pre-meeting packet.    
RECOMMENDATION: Delete the word "saved" in  first line of note (b).  It applies to both "saved" and "yielded", and if so desc ribed, the note is a ppropriately placed 
throughout the table.  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Section 8  
A comment from EPD is included on page 16 of the pre-meeting packet.    
RECOMMENDATION: Adopt suggested change.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus. 

 Formatting and Presentation  
 Comments on formatting and presentation from EPD are included on page 18 of the premeeting packet.    
RECOMMENDATION: Planning c ontractor will incorporate suggested changes and corrections into final plan. Planning contractor will review document for consistency with 
style templates.  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Public Comments  
Next, Rowles reviewed the public comments  on the plan.  She said that members had been sent the full comment document, w ith over 280 pages of comments on all ten 
regional plans.  She also referred to a summary notes documents prepared by the planning contractor review team in their  review of the public comments.  This was 
provided to the council to assist them in  their review, but not to substitute for the comments themselves.  Rowles noted that th e public comments reflected a substantial 
amount of work on the part of the reviewers.   She provided the following as a list of reviewers in the public comments whose comments applied to the LFO region: 
 

\Gamma   Ross King, Association of County Commissioners 
\Gamma   Jenny Hoffner and Gordon Rogers, Flint Riverkeeper and American Rivers 
\Gamma   Brad Currey 
\Gamma   Stephen McCullers, Cobb County Water System 
\Gamma   Zippy Duvall, GA Farm Bureau 
\Gamma   Tammy Wyles, GA Industry Environmental Coalition 
\Gamma   Tanya Blalock, GA Power 
\Gamma   Katie Kirkpatrick, GA Water Alliance 
\Gamma   GA Water Coalition 
\Gamma   Boyd Austin, Metro North GA Water Planning District 
\Gamma   James Phillips, Middle Chattahoochee Water  
\Gamma   Sara Barczak, Southern Alliance for Clean Energy 
\Gamma   Shelly Lakly, Nature Conservancy 
\Gamma   Billy Turner, Tri Rivers Waterway Development Association 
\Gamma   Sandy Tucker, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
\Gamma   Sally Bethea on behalf of several GA Riverkeepers 
\Gamma   Jack Gleason 
\Gamma   Deborah Phillips, GA Industry Environmental Coalition  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 

\Gamma   Bryan Tolar, GA Agribusiness Council 
\Gamma   Neil Fleckenstein, Tall Timbers Land Conservancy 
\Gamma   Jim McClatchey  

Next, Rowles reviewed a list of themes in the public comments:  

\Gamma   Implementation concerns 
\Gamma   Continuation of regional planning 
\Gamma   Resource assessment data, approach, targets 
\Gamma   Forecasts (growth scenarios, energy) 
\Gamma   Conservation priority 
\Gamma   Storage concerns 
\Gamma   Gap closure 
\Gamma   Council membership 
\Gamma   In-stream flow needs 
\Gamma   Water quality concerns  

Rowles noted that many comments addressed  concerns that were  beyond the Council's control.  For example, many comments a ddressed the resource assessments, and these 
were mostly directed at EPD.  The Counc il also had concerns  about the resource assessments, in many cases similar to those raised in the public comments. 
 Rowles noted that the Council was directed  by EPD to consider the public comments and 
determine if it wanted to modify the plan  based on the public comments.  Chairman Royal asked if the Council wished to addr ess anything in the public comments.  Bill 
Yearta advised that the Council appreciated  the public comments.  The council members did not offer any concerns or modifications for discussion.   With no objections, the plan 
was approved by consensus for finalization, with the modifications discussed above.    

Local Elected Official and Public Comments  
No one signed up for public or local offici al comment. Chairman  Royal asked if anyone would like to provide any comments.  Doug W ilson said that on behalf of the Golden 
Triangle Resource Conservation and Development Council, he would like to ask for the Council's support for a 319 grant proposal fo r the Ichawaynochaway sub-basin.  This 
proposal would be for a project similar to  the Spring Creek Partnership in the Ichawaynochaway.  There were no objections, and the  submittal of the letter of support 
was approved by consensus.  There were no further comments from the public or elected officials. 

  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 Final Discussion of Plan for Submittal to EPD 

 Rowles said that the planning  contractor team would work to  finalize the plan next week 
and submit it to EPD in time for the September 30 th deadline. Tim Cash, EPD, noted that he thought the Council did a great job. 
 Jimmy Webb asked Cash if EPD will be  revising the plans based on the public 
comments.  Cash said no; he said that he thought that most of the comments were recommendations for future actions by EPD,  but did not require modification of the 
current plans.  Cash was asked if he kne w anything about the possible future of the regional water councils.  Cash said that th e planning contractors had surveyed council 
members, and about 95% want to be reappoin ted.  Cash said this information has been forwarded to the EPD Director, and there ha ve been discussions with OPB regarding 
funding for the continuation for water planning efforts.  
Chairman Royal thanked everyone for their  efforts. Several council members thanked Chairman Royal and Vice-Chair Haddock for th eir service to the Council.  The meeting 
was adjourned.  
  
     

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 13  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 Attachment 1:  

Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  Council Meeting Attendance - September 20, 2011 
 Council Members 
      Steve Bailey John Bridges 

Jimmy Champion Hal Haddock 
John Heath Huddy Hudgens 
Gary Leddon  Jerry Lee 
Chuck Lingle 

T.E. Moye Greg Murray 
Richard Royal Steve Singletary 
Howard Small Steve Sykes 
Jimmy Webb Bill Yearta 

  

Council Members Not In Attendance  John Bulloch 
Dean Burke Jerry Chapman  
Terry Clark Bob Hanner 
Josh Herring Chris Hobby 

George McIntosh  Doyle Medders 
Rick Moss Mike Newberry 
Jim Quinn Will Vereen 

 Planning Consultants    
Steve Simpson, B&V Mark Masters, GWPPC  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC  Robert Osborne, B&V 
 Georgia EPD  
Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  Bill Morris 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 14  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting   September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 

 
  sim03926 28 6 12 26 8 111 1 268 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - 20110922_LFO_CM11_MEETINGSUMMARY.docx LFO_CM11_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2 