

B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.2  

September 21, 2009  
  
 To:    Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council 
 From:    Kristin Rowles, GWPPC and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch 
 cc:     Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD 
 Subject:   Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 3 on September 15, 2009 
  
The council meeting was held on September 15, 2009 at the McLendon Barn on member Jimmy Webb's farm in Leary, GA.  The list of attendees is attached.  In addition to these 
minutes, the presentations (slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee web portal (http://www.flintochlockonee.org/). 
 Welcome and Introductions/Chairman's Discussion

  

Council Chair Richard Royal stated that a quorum was present and the meeting should begin.  Council member John Bridges gave an invocation.  The Chairman noted the 
recent court ruling in the tri-state ACF litigation.  The council watched a short video message from Governor Sonny Perdue about the ruling and the importance of the 
Council's work.  Mr. Royal emphasized that the court ruling was important for Georgia and this council.  He referred to the memo in the pre-meeting packet from Dr. Couch 
(EPD Director) summarizing the ruling and the state's response.   
Chairman Royal referred to letters he sent to the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and Speaker of the House regarding the Council's preference for the appointment of alternate 
members in the case of a vacancy.  Copies of the letters are in the pre-meeting packet. Chairman Royal said that he had received a response from Lieutenant Governor Casey 
Cagle, who said that he would take the Council's preference on this matter into consideration in the event of a vacancy for which he would be making an appointment. 
 Chairman Royal recognized members of the public attending the meeting and asked them 
to introduce themselves.  The Chairman asked the Council to review the agenda.  He asked whether the agenda was acceptable to the Council.  With no objections, the agenda 
was approved.  The Chairman then asked the Council to approve the minutes of the last Council meeting.  The meeting minutes were approved by a unanimous vote of the 
Council.  
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Agricultural Water Demand Forecasts 

 Dr. Jim Hook presented the agricultural water demand forecasts to the Council.  Dr. 
Hook is recently retired from the UGA National Environmentally Sound Production Agriculture Laboratory (NESPAL), and he is working under contract to GA EPD to 
prepare the agricultural water demand forecasts for the water planning process.  The forecasts are available on the following website: 
http://www.nespal.org/sirp/waterinfo/State/awd/agwaterdemand.htm  (There is also a link to this website from the Council's web portal: www.flintochlockonee.org)  The 
agricultural water demand forecasting team included Dr. James E. Hook, Crop and Soil Sciences and NESPAL; Dr. Gerrit Hoogenboom and Dr. Joel Paz, Department of 
Biological and Agricultural Engineering; Dr. Jeffrey Mullen and Dr. John Bergstrom, Agricultural and Applied Economics; and Dr. Mark Risse, Biological and Agricultural 
Engineering.    
The purpose of the agricultural water demand forecasting project was to prepare projections of irrigation water demand that will meet the needs of the agricultural sector 
for the Georgia economy during the first half of this century.  The projections cover the row and orchard crops, as well as most vegetable and specialty crops, that cover more 
than 95% of Georgia's irrigated land.  Dr. Hook said that the projections assume that there would be no changes in regulation and that resource and land availability would not be 
limiting.  He noted that the approach to forecasting agricultural water demand, like all forecasting, looks to trends from the past and considers foreseeable changes.  He also 
noted the benefits and problems in using computer models for forecasting.   
The steps in forecasting agricultural water demand included the following: 1.  Determine "baseline" irrigated acreage. 

2.  Identify withdrawal sources (groundwater, surface water, ponds). 3.  Project major crop acres through 2050. 
4.  Calculate crop water needs for wet, normal, and dry years. 5.  Project agricultural water withdrawals 2011-2050. 
 The effort started with baseline data on irrigated crops.  Hook noted that the projections 
are based on existing, mapped irrigation locations because they expect that: (1) farmers will continue to use their investments in existing hardware; (2) farmers will expand 
irrigation near existing irrigated fields; (3) Existing irrigation areas have proven water supplies, suitable soils, and established farm support; and (4) all GA counties have room 
for irrigation growth.  For water sources, the projections assume that 2008 sources will continue to be used in the same proportions (70% groundwater, 30% surface water). 
 The forecasters used projections from the USDA, from a Southeast Regional model, and 
from a GA model to determine which crops would be planted on the projected acres.  In making the projections, the forecasters assumed economic conditions will reflect near MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 term effects of the current economic crisis followed by a transition back to steady 

economic gains.  They relied on the Southeast regional and Georgia models to reflect Georgia farmers' preferences among crop choices.  To combine the outputs of the models 
for crop acreages (USDA, SE, GA), the forecasters assumed that the projected acreage would best be projected as the average of the National, Southeast and Georgia models. 
 Next, the forecasters determined the water needs of the projected crop acreages.  The 
water needs of crops grown in GA are known and can be modeled.  The projections do not include any climate change scenarios.  To project irrigation water needs, the 
forecasters assumed that irrigation replaces rainfall deficit in a given year, and they made projections for wet, average, and dry years based on weather patterns of the past 60 years. 
 To pull the pieces together, the forecasters then made the following calculation: Projected 
irrigated area of each crop (acres) multiplied by the predicted monthly irrigation depth for the crop (inch) multiplied by the fraction of water from the water source.  The results 
were then converted from acre-inches to million gallons per day (MGD).    
Overall, the results show that there will be slight increases in Georgia's agricultural irrigation water use over the next 40 years.  There is a wide range in the demand 
projections between wet and dry years.  Across the state, irrigated crop acreage is expected to increase slowly at an average of about 0.5% per year.  
 The chart below shows the projects in the agricultural water demand for the Lower FlintOchlockonee region.  Overall, the Lower Flint Ochlockonee region accounts for 48% of the state's agricultural irrigation water use (surface and groundwater).  In the meeting, 
Dr. Hook reviewed some of the county and region level data from the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee region.  While the overall projections are annualized, the website includes 
seasonal projections for water use.  The chart below shows projected seasonal water use in the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee region for 2011. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 

  
Dr. Hook noted that the following are not included in the agricultural water demand forecasts:  

1.  Commercial & Industrial Landscape irrigation 2.  Home lawn & landscape irrigation 
3.  Golf courses and athletic fields (sod farms producing turf for retail sale are included) 
4.  Retail nurseries and greenhouses (large production nurseries and greenhouses are included) 
5.  Non-irrigation water use on farms including livestock water, processing of farm products and aquaculture 
   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 

  
 The Council members had the following questions and comments for Dr. Hook: 

 Q: Did you consider the effects of conservation on future water demand?   
A: We assumed continued use of existing technology.  We cannot make projections based on technology that we do not yet know about.  A lot of Georgia farms do have 
conservation technologies in place.  Most systems installed since 1990 in Georgia have conservation technologies incorporated (e.g., low pressure systems, drop nozzles, endgun shut-off).    
Q:  Did you consider more intensive use of land and increasing irrigation of pasture? A: Pasture was not included.  Multiple crop rotations are reflected based on existing 
patterns.  
Q: Are golf courses included? A: No (Even though many do have agriculture permits).  Also, animal operations and 
aquaculture are not included.  The projections just concern agricultural irrigation. Comment: We might need to consider this, especially if Florida includes golf courses in 
their irrigation numbers.  
Q: Did you include peaches and pecans? A: Pecans are in there, and some peaches are included into the forecasts. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Comment: I do not want the numbers to be too conservative.  I do not want to lock in on 

low forecast numbers especially with the tri-state litigation on-going.    
Comment: Our nursery operations are not reflected, and yet our use is significant (19 permits, 31 MGD).  We are metered and permitted, and we participate in voluntary 
reporting. A: Sod operations, nurseries, and greenhouses are included where we have records on 
them.  We included metered and permitted sites.  If there are gaps, please let us know. (The Chairman emphasized that the Council should help to identify and fill gaps.) 
 Q: How did the agricultural metering program get used in the forecasting? 
A: We used it to find agricultural water users, but we could not use the data.  There is not yet enough data from the program available, and the data that we do have is from an 
extreme drought year.  As time goes by, we will be able to use meter data to replace model projections. 
 Q: In Perry, EPD mentioned analysis of correlation between meter data and the 
projections.  It was reported that these were close, but in which direction did they differ? A: The comparison was made between the projections and EPD's water use estimation 
tool (not the meter data).  The tool came within 4% for surface water use and 12% for groundwater use. 
 Q: Was that high or low? 
A: The direction of the comparison is not relevant.  It was just a way to check our methodology. 
 Comment: We cannot afford to have projections that are too low.  We might have to 
make-up for depletions on the Chattahoochee from the Flint.  
Comment: We have a very high level of resource availability in our region.  The groundwater is moving, and some enters Florida by going around or under the dam, 
rather than just over it.  
Comment: Florida requires water use reports from farmers by month and by crop.  They know exactly what is used.  We need that here.   
A: Florida has a much bigger budget than Georgia for these purposes.  The smallest water management district in Florida has a larger budget than EPD's total budget.  The 
Suwanee Water Management District in Florida does not yet have agricultural meters in place, so Georgia is ahead on that.   
 Cliff Lewis from EPD then noted that we cannot guarantee that we will get 100% of 
water use, but asked the Council to help fill in the gaps. He said that the forecasts will be continuously updated with new data.  He noted that sub-threshold users (less than  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 100,000 gallons per day) do not show up in the data. Mr. Lewis urged the council 

members to include any recommendations for improving the monitoring of water use in their regional water plan. 
 Dr. Hook said that they are in the process of breaking down the data further into smaller 
regions (aquifer, stream segments).  This data should be available in October.  Dr. Hook asked the Council members to let him know what should be added to the projections. 

 MOA Documents (Action Item) 
 Kristin reminded the Council that at the last meeting they had adopted numerous changes 
that EPD had agreed to in the Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings.  At the last meeting, Chairman Royal appointed a subcommittee to address the outstanding issue 
relating to language on communications with the media.  That subcommittee met, and Hal Haddock gave a brief report.  Kristin reviewed the changes in the Rules for Meetings 
relating to the subcommittee's work: 

\Gamma   On page 1, at the bottom, the following sentence was deleted: The [EPD] representative is also available to talk with members of the media. 

\Gamma   On page 2, the following was added (Rule 3, #8): The Chair may speak to the media on behalf of the Council without prior approval of EPD. If the Chair 

communicates with the media regarding Council business, the Chair will inform the EPD Director of such communication.  This language replaced the following 
language: Media communications will be coordinated between the Chair and the EPD representative. 

Kristin said that the subcommittee's change was acceptable to EPD, and the documents were ready to be executed if the Council so wished.  Chairman Royal advised that the 
changes were acceptable to him and asked if the Council was ready to adopt the documents.  Jimmy Webb made a motion to adopt the documents, and the motion was 
seconded.  The Council adopted the documents with no objections.  Kristin asked that the Council members sign the MOA signature page at lunch time. 

 Visioning 
 Kristin provided a review of the purpose of the vision statement and how it is being 
developed by the Council.  She said that the regional planning guidance document says that the vision should describe the economic, population, environmental and water use 
conditions desired for the future.  The vision statement will be used to develop action-oriented goals and to guide the selection of management practices.  The vision statement 
can be revisited and revised as needed to be consistent with other parts of the regional plan as it is developed.   
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Kristin said that the following was the vision statement that was used during the 

development of the Statewide Water Plan:    

Georgia manages water resources in a sustainable manner to support the state's economy, to protect public health and natural systems, and to 
enhance the quality of life for all citizens.  
The regional vision will tailor this vision statement to this region.  
Kristin then reviewed the following Council's responses at Council Meeting #1 regarding trends, forces, and factors affecting water resources in the region: 
 

\Gamma   Substantial economic uncertainty 
\Gamma   Increasing use of water conservation practices 
\Gamma   Difficult to predict future demand for water based on recent trends 
\Gamma   Increasing attention and possible regulatory pressure related to water quality concerns 

\Gamma   Improved water resource information (but better information still needed) 
\Gamma   Significant constraints on water resource management as a result of political and natural factors 

 Next, Kristin referred the Council to the visioning assignment, which asked the 
following:   

1.  What do you want your rivers, lakes and groundwater to do for you and the citizens in your planning region?  

Consider the following: T,   Supporting the region's and state's economy 

T,   Protecting public health and natural systems T,   Enhancing the quality of life for all citizens 
2.   What do you want to protect? 3.   What do you want to achieve with your water resources 
 Then, Kristin asked the Council members to help prepare a list of responses to these 
questions, based on their individual responses to the questions.  This list could then be used by a subcommittee to draft a regional vision statement.  The Council members 
offered the following responses:  

\Gamma   Human Consumption - Survival 
\Gamma   Water should be affordable 
\Gamma   Economic stability 
\Gamma   Importance of agricultural and industrial use  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 

\Gamma   Agriculture provides national security benefits 
\Gamma   Recreational use of water  
\Gamma   Power Generation 
\Gamma   ACOE Management will affect LFO region 
\Gamma   Concern for aquatic life 
\Gamma   Endangered Species - concern over too much flow devoted to this purpose 
\Gamma   Information needs to support decision making  
\Gamma   Balance economic growth with resource availability 
\Gamma   Variability of resources within the region   

At the conclusion of this discussion, the Chairman appointed the following Council members to a subcommittee to prepare a vision statement for the Council to consider: 
Representative Bob Hanner, Josh Herring, T.E. Moye, George McIntosh, and Rick Moss.  Representative Hanner will serve as the chair of the subcommittee. 
 Planning Guidance 
 Kristin explained that EPD has published a regional planning guidance for the Council.  
The guidance is available through the Council's web portal.  The guidance will be an aid in preparing the various parts of the regional water plan, and it will also be used by EPD 
to evaluate the plan when considering final adoption.  Kristin referred the members to the executive summary of the guidance as a good overview of the planning process and what 
will be expected of the Council and EPD.  
Kristin presented the following graphic from the planning guidance as an over-arching illustration that describes the regional water planning process:   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
  

  
Kristin presented the following from the planning guidance as a schedule for the pieces of the planning process described in the graphic above: 

  

PRODUCTS REGIONAL WATER PLANNING COUNCIL ACTIVITIES SCHEDULED
Regional vision and goals April 2009 - September 2009

Assessment of baseline resource capacity November 2009 - March 2010
Forecasts of demand February 2009 - March 2010

Gap analysis (i.e. comparison of resources and demands 
to identify gaps)

January 2010 - October 2010

Water management practices to adjust demand and resource capacity January 2010 - January 2011
Recommended regional water plan January 2011 - June 2011

PRODUCTS REGIONAL WATER PLANNING COUNCIL ACTIVITIES SCHEDULED
Regional vision and goals April 2009 - September 2009

Assessment of baseline resource capacity November 2009 - March 2010
Forecasts of demand February 2009 - March 2010

Gap analysis (i.e. comparison of resources and demands 
to identify gaps)

January 2010 - October 2010

Water management practices to adjust demand and resource capacity January 2010 - January 2011
Recommended regional water plan January 2011 - June 2011

PRODUCTSPRODUCTSPRODUCTS REGIONAL WATER PLANNING COUNCIL ACTIVITIES SCHEDULEDREGIONAL WATER PLANNING COUNCIL ACTIVITIES SCHEDULEDREGIONAL WATER PLANNING COUNCIL ACTIVITIES SCHEDULED
Regional vision and goalsRegional vision and goalsRegional vision and goals April 2009 - September 2009April 2009 - September 2009April 2009 - September 2009

Assessment of baseline resource capacityAssessment of baseline resource capacityAssessment of baseline resource capacity November 2009 - March 2010November 2009 - March 2010November 2009 - March 2010
Forecasts of demandForecasts of demandForecasts of demand February 2009 - March 2010February 2009 - March 2010February 2009 - March 2010

Gap analysis (i.e. comparison of resources and demands 
to identify gaps)
Gap analysis (i.e. comparison of resources and demands 
to identify gaps)
Gap analysis (i.e. comparison of resources and demands 
to identify gaps)

January 2010 - October 2010January 2010 - October 2010January 2010 - October 2010

Water management practices to adjust demand and resource capacityWater management practices to adjust demand and resource capacityWater management practices to adjust demand and resource capacity January 2010 - January 2011January 2010 - January 2011January 2010 - January 2011
Recommended regional water planRecommended regional water planRecommended regional water plan January 2011 - June 2011January 2011 - June 2011January 2011 - June 2011

   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Next, Kristin reviewed the responsibilities of the Council: 

T,  Develop a recommended plan T, 

Submit to EPD by January 31, 2011 T, 
Make revisions based on EPD and public comment and finalize recommended plan by June 30, 2011 

 The following are EPD responsibilities: 
T,   Provide guidance and template to ensure completeness and consistency T, 

 Provide public notice and 45-day comment period T, 
 Review recommended plan for consistency with State Water Plan, rules, and guidance 

T,   Adopt recommended plan if consistent with State Water Plan, rules, and guidance  T, 

 Use final adopted plan to guide agency decision making  

Kristin encouraged the Council to review the planning guidance and to use it as a reference. 
 Public Involvement Plan

  

Kristin referred the Council members to the draft Public Involvement Plan, which is included in the regional planning guidance.  She reviewed each section of the public 
involvement plan to see if Council members had any suggestions for modifications to the document, which will be adopted at a future meeting.  The Council members made the 
following comments and requests:  

\Gamma   Chairman Royal asked for a copy of the comments received on the population and employment forecasts for this region. (Kristin will send.) 
\Gamma   Council members suggested that biographical and contact information could be included on the Council website.  They would also like to receive contact 

information for council members. (Kristin will contact member individually to see what information they would like to share on the website. She will send a council 
directory to council members.) 
\Gamma   Council members noted that it is important to contact both elected officials and staff people when reaching out to local governments. 

\Gamma   Howard Small asked for a brief summary of Council activities that could be shared with local governments that council members have contact with. 
\Gamma   Council members asked that a provision be added to the Public Involvement Plan to ensure follow-up when input is not being received. 

 Kristin asked members to provide her with press contacts that they would like to ensure 
receive council information.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Kristin will modify the plan as requested and send out the information requested by 

Council members in this discussion.  Chairman Royal said that the Council could take up the Public Involvement Plan for adoption at the next meeting. 
 Council Coordination 
 Next, Kristin talked about coordination with other water planning councils and upcoming 
joint council meetings in January 2010.  The councils have a strong interest in coordination among councils, as noted by the Chairs and Vice Chairs at a July leadership 
meeting with Dr. Couch.  Furthermore, the Statewide Water Plan calls for council coordination.   
 Kristin said that for January 2010, a series of six joint council meetings are being 
planned. These meetings will be "resource-based" in that councils that share water resources will meet together.  At the joint meetings in January meetings, the results of the 
resource assessments will be presented.  Another round of joint council meetings will be held in April 2010.  These will also be focused on the resource assessments.   
 Kristin showed two maps - one for surface watersheds and one for aquifers - which 
illustrates how council boundaries cross resource boundaries and which councils share which water resources.  Then, she showed a draft set of groupings for the January 
Council meetings.  The Lower Flint Ochlockonee will be a part of the following groupings: 
 

\Gamma   Flint & Ochlockonee River Basins/Dougherty Plain, Claiborne Aquifers 
\Gamma   Satilla, Suwanee & St. Mary's River Basins/Tift County Upper Floridan Aquifer  

Kristin said that at its next meeting, the Council might wish to discuss who will attend which meetings on behalf of the Council.  She noted that the meeting will be open.  She 
asked the Council to consider whether it wished to participate in any of the other resource groupings. 
 Jimmy Champion noted that January is a very busy month of meetings for the farm sector 
and anticipated difficulty in scheduling.  Jim Quinn advised that Tuesdays were not good for scheduling meetings.  Kristin said that she would get schedule information to the 
Council as soon as it is available.   
Population and Employment Forecasts  
Kristin reported that the revised population and employment projections were not ready to present at this meeting.  Since the last meeting, comments on the projections were 
considered and addressed by the forecasters.  The revised projections will include high, medium, and low growth scenarios.  The Office of Planning and Budget (OPB), which  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 13  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 contracted the population and employment projections, is reviewing the revised 

projections and will select a preferred projection to recommend to each council.   OPB is meeting with the Governor sometime in September to review the revised projections.  
The projections are expected to be available by the next Council meeting.  Kristin said that the Council would be able to select which projections it would like to include in the 
water planning process.  Kristin noted that the projections are important for the water planning process, but for many other state functions as well.  
 Flint Plan Update 
 At the end of the last council meeting, Council members requested information on 
whether and how the existing Flint Plan would be updated and on permit issued for agricultural withdrawals since the moratorium on Floridan permits was lifted in 2006. 
To answer these questions, first Kristin said that she discussed the plan update with EPD, and the response from EPD was that the plans that are being prepared in the regional 
water planning process will update and replace the Flint Plan.    
Next, Mark Masters provided an overview of the existing Flint Plan.  The Flint Plan involved scientific assessment of water resources and led to adoption of new water 
resource management practices.  Mark reviewed the assessment process and the new management practices that came from the Flint Plan.  Mark's slides are available through 
the Council web portal.  
During the development of the Flint Plan, there was a moratorium on new agricultural groundwater withdrawal permits from the Floridan aquifer.  With the adoption of the 
Flint Plan and the adoption of new management practices for agricultural withdrawals, the moratorium was lifted in March 2006.  Kristin provided the Council with a map and 
charts showing where permits had been issued in the Lower Flint, Ichawaynochaway, and Spring Creek sub-basins since the lifting of the moratorium.  These are available through 
the Council web portal.   
Jimmy Webb expressed concern that permits could not be issued in parts of the region in Georgia, but in Florida, permits for withdrawals from the same aquifer could be issued.  
Jimmy Webb and Chris Hobby expressed concern that farmers and Georgia were not getting credit for water flowing into Florida via groundwater. 
 Chairman Royal asked for a version of the permit map with more points of reference on 
it.  (Kristin will provide to the Council).  
A member asked when a permit applicant received a permit and if he would already have a substantial investment before he knew if the permit would be granted.  Cliff Lewis 
explained that the permit was not issued until the process was complete, but the applicant  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 14  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 would receive a letter of concurrence earlier in the process if the permit was expected to 

be issued.  
Dean Burke noted that in Mark's presentation there were to be no new permits in "red" areas on the map (capacity use), but that several had been issued.  Kristin asked Cliff 
Lewis (EPD) to address this question.  Cliff said that exceptions are made to the prohibition if a permit applicant is giving up a surface water permit or if the applicant can 
demonstrate that another farmer is relinquishing their withdrawal permit.  He also noted that if a farm straddles across red/yellow/green areas, the agency works with the 
applicant.  
Jimmy Webb asked if the exception for permits involved selling permits.  Cliff Lewis said that permits were not sold, but that agricultural water use permits would transfer 
with property.    
One member asked what "WTP" stands for.  It is an abbreviation for well to pond.  
Another member asked why a specific permit that had been issued in a red area.  Cliff Lewis responded that the information was public, and so, an explanation would be 
available from EPD.  
Resource Assessments  
Jim Kennedy is the state geologist.  A biographical sketch on Kennedy's credentials was provided to the council in advance of the meeting.  Kennedy made a presentation about 
the resource assessment process, with a specific focus on the groundwater resource assessment.  Three resource assessments are underway: surface water availability, 
groundwater availability, and surface water quality.  Kennedy's slides are available on the Council's web portal. 
 Kennedy provided an overview of groundwater in Georgia and discussed the criteria for 
prioritizing aquifers in the resource assessment process.  With respect to the groundwater assessment, Kennedy noted that in the LFO region, the priority aquifers are the Upper 
Floridan and the Claiborne.  For the Upper Floridan in the Dougherty Plain, he will be using the existing USGS model with some updates to the inputs based on new 
information.  For the Claiborne, he will be using a USGS model from 1997.  This model includes several aquifers (Claiborne, Clayton, Upper Floridan).   
 The output of the assessment process will be a sustainable yield for each aquifer unit 
assessed.  The sustainable yield is the amount that can be withdrawn without causing an unacceptable impact.  For the Upper Floridan Dougherty Plain region, an unacceptable 
impact is defined as (1) reduction of the base flow of streams using 25% of average annual discharge (AAD) as an initial benchmark, and (2) a drop in groundwater levels of  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 15  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 more than 30 feet that could impact nearby wells or create sinkholes.  The modeled 

values are looking at 90% level recovery within 30 days.  The benchmarks may be subject to change during the modeling conducted in the assessment.  The sustainable 
yield will recognize seasonal use.   
Kennedy said that after the determination of sustainable yield, management practices can be used to maximize groundwater withdrawals within the sustainable yield of the aquifer.  
He said the existing Flint Plan can be used a source for management practices.    
A council member asked whether Kennedy will be able to calculate the amount of water available in an aquifer.  Kennedy answered yes. 
 A council member asked if Kennedy is considering the movement of groundwater in the 
aquifer.  Kennedy answered yes.  
Chairman Royal asked about the use of the USGS models.  Kennedy said that the models are a starting point and that the models will be refined with more recent data. 
 Chairman Royal asked about the use of the 25% of AAD benchmark.  Kennedy 
responded that EPD has used it in permitting and that it will be evaluated in the assessment process. 
 Kennedy noted that he is working closely with Dr. Wei Zeng, who is responsible for the 
surface water availability assessment, due to the close interconnection of the Upper Floridan in the region with surface water. 
 A council member asked whether the MODFLOW model had been reviewed.  Kennedy 
said it was reviewed by a Scientific and Engineering Advisory Panel.  He noted that he is using MODFLOW because is it readily available and user friendly, but still sophisticated 
enough for our purposes.  
A council member noted that the Floridan is a very large aquifer and asked how the location of withdrawals would be figured into the assessment.  Kennedy responded that 
this was not a part of the resource assessment, which will look at the aquifer's sustainable yield on a broad level, but that in the evaluation of management practices, we could 
model based on location to evaluate impacts.  
A council member asked how big rainfall events (such as hurricanes) are accounted for in the model.  Kennedy noted that they show up in the long-term average data that are being 
used.  
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 16  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Municipal and Industrial Water Demand Forecasting 

 Steve Simpson presented the methodology that is being used to forecast municipal and 
industrial water and wastewater demands for the planning process.  Steve began by explaining each of the variables from the following PowerPoint slide:  

Fu tu re   W a te r  N e e d :

B a s e   Y e a r P e r  C a p ita  

W a te r D e m a n d F u tu re  P o p u la tio n

F u tu re  W a te r 

N e e d
R e g io n  S p e c ific  
F a c to rs

B a s e   Y e a r P e r  C a p ita  

W a te r D e m a n d F u tu re  P o p u la tio n
B a s e   Y e a r P e r  C a p ita  

W a te r D e m a n d F u tu re  P o p u la tio n

F u tu re  W a te r 

N e e d
R e g io n  S p e c ific  
F a c to rs
  

Next, Steve explained how future self-supplied water demand was to be calculated.  He explained each one of the variables in the following slide: 

75 gpcd

Total Population 
- Publicly Supplied 
Population

Self-Supplied 
Water Demand
Municipal / SelfSupplied Ratio75 gpcd

Total Population 
- Publicly Supplied 
Population
75 gpcd

Total Population 
- Publicly Supplied 
Population

Self-Supplied 
Water Demand
Municipal / SelfSupplied Ratio

Future  Se lf Sup p lie d  Wa te r De m a nd :

  
 Steve explained that plumbing code efficiency was incorporated into the methodology.  
This was a result of the 1992 National Energy Policy Act (NEPAct) mandated use of 1.6 gallon per flush toilets.  The Savings from replacement of older toilets due to plumbing 
code efficiencies will be specific to each county based on census age of housing data.  
Steve then explained that both inflow, stormwater entering at points of direct connection, and infiltration, groundwater entering through cracks and/or leaks, were incorporated into 
the methodology.  An average percentage will be estimated for each water planning region based on input from water users. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 17  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Steve then used the following PowerPoint slide to explain the total wastewater generation 

methodology.  

  

To ta l Wa ste wa te r 
G e ne ra tio n

Centralized Treatment 

Fac ility

Septic Systems
*Based on 1990 US Census Bureau Data**Based on Existing GA EPD Permit Data

Pop. Served 
Ratio*

Permit Data 

Ratio**

Point Discharges

Land Application Systems
Next, Steve explained the industrial demand methodology using the following PowerPoint slide.  Steve noted water is needed for industrial processes, sanitation, 
cooling and some domestic (employee) use and this need is linked to production, but production units are in multiple forms and often data are proprietary.  Therefore, 
since employment is linked to production and employment data is available; this data will be used to determine future industrial water demand.  
 

Current
Water Need

Production

Unit

Production

Unit

Current
Employment

Future
Employment

Future

Water

Need

Current
Water Need

Production

Unit

Production

Unit

Current
Employment

Future
Employment

Current
Water Need

Production

Unit

Production

Unit

Current
Employment

Future
Employment

Future

Water

Need

 The Council members had the following questions: 
 

\Gamma   One council member asked what happens if there is water use right near a border and the water use is used in another jurisdiction.  Steve explained that this will be 

investigated on a case by case basis.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 18  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
  

\Gamma   One member questioned whether one can really capture industrial productivity per person.   
 

\Gamma   A council member asked about 75 gallons per capita per day number used in calculating the forecasted self supply.  Steve noted this was an estimate based on 

a previous study in Georgia.  
\Gamma   Industrial water use forecasting was discussed.  Steve advised that if credible estimates of industry statewide water use are developed, this can be used in the 

industrial estimates.   
Steve noted draft water demand and wastewater flow projections will be presented for review and comment at Council Meeting 4. Steve's slides are available on the Council 
web portal.    
Management Practices  
Kristin introduced the idea of management practices to the council.  A management practice is any program or activity that is undertaken to meet the forecasted regional 
water and wastewater needs without exceeding: water availability (surface and ground water) and assimilative (water quality) capacity.  Kristin reviewed examples of 
management practices.  She referred to the planning guidance to explain the role of management practices in the regional water plan.  She explained that through 2010, the 
Council would be focused on selecting the management practices that would be a part of the regional water plan.  She said that the plan was for the councils to use a decision 
matrix with weighted criteria to make management practice selections and that management practice selections would be refined based on evaluations using resource 
models.    
Next, Kristin provided an overview of the Water Conservation Implementation Plan (WCIP), which was called for in the Statewide Water Plan and adopted by the DNR 
Board earlier this year.  She noted that the Statewide Water Plan emphasizes water conservation as a priority management practice.  The Statewide Water Plan states that 
while water conservation alone cannot be expected to fully meet future water needs, water conservation is an effective and efficient management practice to meet some needs 
for all water users in the state.  Further, it states that to support current and future use of water, and in accordance with DNR Rules 391-3-2-.04(11) and 391-3-6-.07(4)(b)(8)(ix), 
water conservation must be incorporated into long-term water demand and supply planning and measurable progress must be made toward water conservation goals and 
more efficient use of water.  The Statewide Water Plan calls for rule-making regarding demonstration of progress by withdrawal permit holders (non-farm) toward water 
conservation goals/benchmarks identified in WCIP and refined in regional water plans.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 19  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
  

The Water Conservation Implementation Plan includes a series of goals and benchmarks for water efficiency for each of seven major water use sectors in the state (agriculture, 
electric generation, golf courses, industrial/commercial, landscape irrigation, domestic/non-industrial public use, state agencies).  The purposes of the WCIP are to: 
educate water users about water conservation practices and goals; informs regional water plan preparation; help water use sectors collectively improve water use efficiency; and 
inform DNR rule-making regarding water conservation requirements in permitting. Kristin referred the council to the full WCIP document for more information.  An Internet 
link to the document was included with the pre-meeting materials and can be found on the Council web portal. 
 Next, Kristin asked three council members to talk about the water management practices 
that they use: Jerry Lee, plant nursery; Chris Hobby, municipal water/wastewater system; Steve Singletary, agriculture. 
 Jerry Lee, Monrovia Nurseries, said that his facility reuses 95% of its water.  They are 
able to capture a large amount of water that runs off the nursery plantings, which have a high runoff coefficient.  They have onsite storage for the first 1/2" of rainfall.  They use a 
combination of storage and treatment through a constructed wetland to manage the captured runoff.   
 Chris Hobby, City of Bainbridge, discussed his city's water and wastewater utilities.  The 
City serves about 12000 people through 6500 water accounts.  He said that the city does not have property tax revenues, but instead supports its budget through utility revenues.  
He said that his water system is well below its permitted capacity (approximately 3 mgd used with a permitted capacity of 4.4 mgd).  The City's need for revenue and the lack of a 
capacity constraint affect how the city manages water.  They are very interested in controlling leaks in the system and controlling unaccounted for water use.  However, they 
have relatively low losses and low inflow since their sewer system is newer.  Other residential conservation programs do not make sense for his utility. 
 Steve Singletary is on the board of the Flint Soil and Water Conservation District and the 
state Soil and Water Conservation Commission.  He discussed the District's recent award of $10 million in NRCS AWEP funds for agricultural water conservation.  Practices 
funded will include refurbishment of ponds, conservation retrofits for irrigation systems, and variable rate irrigation.  Funds received for this year were quickly expended, mostly 
for conservation retrofits.  More funds will be available in the coming years.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 20  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
  

 Local Elected Officials and Public Comments  
Next, the Council provided time for local elected officials and the general public to address the council.  There were no elected officials or members of the public who 
wished to speak.     
Wrap-Up and What to Expect Next Meeting  
The next Council meeting will be on November 17 at the Bridge House in Albany.  Council member Chuck Lingle has made arrangements for us.  Kristin will send details 
about the meeting.    
Next, Kristin referred to two items in the meeting packet that were not discussed in the meeting: water regulatory primer and results of the water topics information needs survey 
of the council.  These are information items for the Council.  
Next, Kristin reviewed the meeting objectives and noted that they were met.  Next, she reviewed a list of follow-up items that she would be acting on (see below).  Finally, she 
reviewed topics for the next council meeting:  

\Gamma   Municipal and industrial water and wastewater demand forecasts 
\Gamma   Revised population and employment projections 
\Gamma   Plans for joint council meetings 
\Gamma   Vision statement 
\Gamma   Management practice selection criteria 
\Gamma   Region specific information  

Council Meeting 3 Evaluation At the conclusion of the council meeting, the members completed evaluation forms on 
the meeting. Then, the meeting was adjourned.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 21  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
 Action List (Follow-Up) 

 

\Gamma   Send comments on population and employment projects from Lower Flint-Ochlockonee region (Kristin) 

\Gamma   Collect and post biographical and contact information (as desired) for Council members on website (Kristin) 
\Gamma   Distribute council contact information to council members (Kristin) 
\Gamma   Submit press contacts (those that you wish to receive council information) to Kristin (Council members) 

\Gamma   Timeline information on plans to make use of agricultural water meter data (Kristin) 
\Gamma   Provide a summary of council activities that can be shared with local government contacts of council members (Kristin) 
\Gamma   Revise the Public Involvement Plan as noted in today's meeting (Kristin) 
\Gamma   Add reference points to the ag permit map (Kristin) 
\Gamma   Draft vision statement (subcommittee with Kristin's assistance)  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 22  
Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 3  September 21, 2009 
Meeting Date: September 15, 2009 
  Attachment 1:  

Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Water Planning Council  Council Meeting Attendance - September 15, 2009  
 Council Members 
Steve Bailey  John M. Bridges  
Dean Burke  Jimmy Champion  
Terry Clark Hal Haddock  
Bob Hanner (Ex-Officio)  John A. Heath  
John G. Herring  Chris Hobby  
Gary W. Leddon  Jerry Lee  

Chuck Lingle  George C. McIntosh (Alternate)  
Rick Moss Greg Murray  
Jim Quinn Richard Royal  
Steve Singletary  Howard G. Small Jr.  
Steve Sykes  Will Vereen  
Jimmy Webb  
  Council Members Not In Attendance  

Jerry Chapman  Huddy R. Hudgens, Jr. (Alternate)  
Bill Yearta T.E. Moye  
Doyle Medders (Alternate)  John Bulloch (Ex-Officio)  
Mike Newberry   
Planning Consultants  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC  
Steve Simpson, B&V Jim Hawkins, B&V 
Nils Thompson, LGB Mark Masters, GWPPC 
Robert Osborne, B&V  
Georgia EPD  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  
Bill Morris Cliff Lewis 
Tommy Rumpett  
  

Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission 
Antonio Fleming  
   Robert Osborne 44 45 16 13 9 109 2 285 1  -14400 MEETING MINUTES  LFO_CM3_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 9.0 for Word 