 

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 19, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 13, 2011 
 Overview of Plan Revisions and Plan Review Committee Recommendations 

 Council member Jeff Lukken asked Jim Hawkins to provide an update on the 
Committee's recommendations. Jim said most comments were incorporated into the draft plan; however, there were a few more comments that were received and are summarized 
as a handout to the Council. Jim provided a brief overview of comments incorporated into the draft since the last Council meeting. 
 Jim reviewed each of the eight items in the handout, beginning with the following Item 1: 
   Item 1. page 3-14, insert the following additional impact:  

River Flow Impacts. In addition to Corp operations and the affects on river flow, the Council is concerned about upstream and regional 
consumptive use and flow returns to the river. Upstream interbasin transfers and increases in consumptive use reduce downstream flows and 
reduce the natural flows in the river. The Council encourages better stewardship through land use planning and permitting to maximize flow 
returns to the river. Furthermore, a more scientific understanding is needed for such uses as agricultural irrigation, wastewater land 
application, and septic systems in order to better quantify the water balance with truer representations of consumptive uses associated with 
these uses.  
Council member Ken Penuel asked if this item speaks to the upcoming ACF Master Water Control Manual update. Jim said yes and also mentioned that actually all of the 
points in Chapter 3 relate to the updated control manual.  Council member Steve Davis asked if this language also addresses issues during times of drought.  Jim said yes.  
 There was no further discussion on this item. 
 Next, Jim reviewed the following Item 2: 
   Item 2. page 3-12, add the following to the first paragraph:  

Similarly, the relationships between water turbidity, water detention/velocity, water temperature, precedent weather/flow conditions, 
pH, growing season duration and algal growth require further study in West Point and Walter F. George lakes to establish a chlorophyll-a 
standard that is appropriate for these reservoirs. A chlorophyll-a standard of 25 micrograms/liter for Walter F. George Lake has been suggested as 
reflective of Southeastern Plains Ecoregion reservoirs (Raschke 1994, EPA 1999). 
   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 19, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 13, 2011 
 Council member Steve Davis commented that there were inconsistencies with the 

chlorophyll-a modeling and we need more scientific study especially for different ecoregions.  
 Next, Jim reviewed the following Item 3: 
   Item 3. page 3-5, add the following to the second paragraph under Navigation:  

Navigation is important to the regional economy and must be maintained between Columbus and Apalachicola Bay. 
 Ken Penuel commented that he had heard the locks will be potentially reduced to three 
times a day for maintenance and suggested we may need to address funding. Council member Paul Chappell thought this language implies funding.  Jeff Lukken agreed they 
did not want to interject the Council into the ACOE business.  Penuel agreed with Lukken.  
 Jim reviewed the following Item 4: 
  

Item 4. page 6-4, Table 6-1, revise WW-2 as follows:   

WW-2: Encourage studies to determine the appropriate water returns ratios for 

agricultural irrigation and wastewater land application and septic systems 

The assumption of 100% consumptive use is believed to inadequately reflect the 
quantity and timeliness of water returns from agricultural irrigation and wastewater 
land application and septic systems. This exacerbates the magnitude and duration of 
gaps in the EPD resource assessments. The studies would be scaled to reflect 
appropriate geographic and physiographic provinces, since returns would be 
dependent on topography, soil, and climate differences.  
  
There was no discussion on this item.   

Jim reviewed the following Item 5:  

Item 5. page 7-14, Section 7-4 Recommendations to the State, at the end of Recommendation 1, insert the following:  
  The following modeling constraints are the beginning point for revisions 

to the Corps' water control manual.    

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 19, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 13, 2011 
  INSERT Table 5-1 showing the desire flows and lake levels 

 Chair Windom commented that the language really tried to look at the entire basin and 
not just Middle Chattahoochee.    
Next, Jim reviewed the following Item 6:  
Item 6. page 7-16, revise the third recommendation to read as follows:   

3. Metro North District Returns and Nutrient Loading   

The May 7, 2009 Metro North District Plan includes ambitious predictions of returns to the river for which the Middle Chattahoochee 
resource assessments now greatly depend. The Council would like a comprehensive audit of these predictions and ongoing measurement and 
regular reporting on the progress to achieving these goals. Furthermore, the Council desires that such progress be reported as a range of statistical 
flows, including mean, minimum, and maximum values of consumptive use.  
 The Middle Chattahoochee Council is also concerned about the nutrient 
load increase projected for 2050 that is estimated at the Whitesburg gauge. Nutrient loadings of phosphorus and nitrogen are expected to 
increase 200 percent by 2050. The Middle Chattahoochee region should not be burdened with additional waste water treatment or storm water 
BMPs caused by increases in upstream discharges.   
Specific to nutrients, the Council is concerned about the increases in phosphorus and nitrogen and the resulting chlorophyll-a to West Point 
Lake and Lake Walter F. George and the potential for degradation of lake water quality.  
 The Council requests that the Metro North District provide: 1) specific 
details of how the increased nutrient load will be mitigated before it reaches the Middle Chattahoochee basin, and 2) provide annual progress 
reports of nutrient levels and reduction effectiveness.   
Finally, the Council recommends a peer review of the lake and watershed models to better understand the methodology as it relates to the output 
and calibration. Pending the review, the council recommends that the model outputs not be utilized for setting water quality standards instream 
or for any other regulatory purposes, including point source permitting in the region.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 19, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 13, 2011 
 Lukken asked the Council what we are asking EPD to do with this language.  Lukken 

continued and asked if the Council wanted EPD to permit without modeling. Council member Steve Davis thought we were asking EPD to "holdup" on the modeling until the 
model is peer reviewed.  Chair Windom said he felt many council members were uneasy about the model.  Steve Simpson noted that these ideas about the model are reflected in 
different parts of the plan.  After some more discussion, there was consensus to leave the text as suggested. 
 Next, Jim reviewed the following Item's 7 and 8: 
  Item 7. page 8-6, insert the following text as follows:  

The Council recommends an increased awareness of water balance in the region and therefore, has requested that additional measurement and 
water return ratio studies be performed to better understand consumptive uses and related water returns. Once completed, this information will 
better equip the Council and region for managing consumptive uses and allow the Council's vision of an abundant water supply for our 
descendants to be achieved.  
Item 8. pages 8-5 to 8-7, the following change will be made:  Referring to EPD discussions with Black & Veatch about the draft plan  

Section 8-5 will be removed and will be incorporated into an Executive Summary that will be inserted at the beginning of the plan. 
  
There were no discussions on these items. However, a council member did ask if the Council needed to revise the census number to reflect the actual census numbers for 

2010.  Chair Windom thought this would not change the results much in the plan and was probably better to defer this change.   
 There was no further discussion.  Each of the items will be incorporated into the plan. 
 

 
Final Discussion of the Plan for Submittal to EPD and Plan Process/Timeline 

Chair Windom asked the Council members if they have any additional comments about the plan. Council member Aaron McWhorter said he was concerned that the plan did not 
discuss erosion control sufficiently. Council member Gordon Moss said the plan did discuss erosion control on page 6-7 of the plan. Lukken suggested they should have a 
system to address any council comments.  Jim Hawkins said he or Steve Simpson would help Council Members with questions. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 19, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 13, 2011 
 Chair Windom asked the Council if there were any other final comments and told the 

Council there will be another chance to comment after the public comment period.  
Council member Paul Chappell asked what was the timeline for the Council going forward.  Steve Simpson said this is a good question and reviewed the following 
milestone schedule with the Council:  

Completion Date  Milestone 
April 13, 2011  Council Meeting 10 
May 2, 2011  Recommended Plan to GA EPD 
May-July 2011  Public Notice of Draft Plan 
August 2011  Final Production of Adopted WDCP 
September 30, 2011  GA EPD Approves the Middle Chattahoochee Regional WDCP 

 Council member Steve Davis asked the Council if they will meet again.  Steve Simpson 
said they have talked with EPD about another September Council, but this is not confirmed.   
 

Chair Windom passed out a resolution (Attachment 2) and asked the Council to consider this resolution.  Paul Chappell made a motion to adopt the plan for submittal to EPD. 
Jimmy Knight seconded this motion.  Chair Windom asked the Council in a vote.  The resolution to adopt the plan for submittal to EPD passed unanimously. 

Resolution - Adoption of Plan for Submittal to EPD 

 Public comments 
Next, Chair Windom asked if there were any local elected officials or members of the public that would like to comment.  There were no comments. 
 Wrapup/Council Meeting 9 Evaluation 
Council member Alan Bell asked the Council if it true that Judge Magnuson's ruling is being reversed.  Several members said no. There is a potential that the ruling may be 
stayed, but there is no judgment yet.  
Next, Windom praised EPD. He said EPD honored its commitment to back away from the process and he appreciates that.  Tim Cash said it was a fine plan and recognized the 
council members for their hard work.  
Finally, Chair Windom thanked the council members, Black & Veatch, and stakeholders.  There were no additional comments and the meeting was adjourned.    

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 10  April 19, 2011 
Meeting Date: April 13, 2011 
  

Attachment 1:  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council  
Council Meeting Attendance - April 13, 2011   
Council Members Alan Bell 
Paul Chappell Steve Davis 
Philip Eidson Thomas Ellis 
Joe Griffith Jimmy Knight 
Harry Lange Jeff Lukken 
Aaron McWhorter 

Gordon Moss Ken Penuel 
Denny Rogers Jimmy Thompson 
Robert Watkins Don Watson 
Matt Windom Jim Woods 
Robie York 
  Council Members Not In Attendance  

Jimmy Bradley Larry Dillard 
Gardiner Garrard Gerald Greene 
Bill Gregory 

Bill Heath Joe Maltese 
Walter Rosso Randy Simpkins 
Brad Yates  
Planning Consultants    Jim Hawkins, B&V 
Steve Simpson, B&V  Robert Osborne, B&V  
Georgia EPD  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  
Bill Morris  
Georgia State Agencies Patti Lanford, GA DNR - WRD Fisheries 
  
  
  
  
     Robert Osborne 53 51 16 20 3 111 3 109 1  -14400  MEETING MINUTES  MCH_CM10_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 9.1 for Word 