

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  

  
October 20, 2010 (Revised)  
M E M O R A N D U M  
 TO:   Council Members  
     FROM:  David Ashley, JJG/Jacobs 
 SUBJECT:  CM#7 Meeting Summary 
    Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting  
CC:    Kevin Farrell, GA EPD Charlotte Weber, JJG/Jacobs  

Tai-Yi Su, JJG/Jacobs      
     Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan 

Regional Water Planning  
CM#7 Meeting Summary  
Meeting Date:  September 22, 2010 Location:    EMC Training Center 
 1) Welcome and Introduction  
 Council Chairman Richardson welcomed the group.   Chairman Richardson thanked everyone for 
their participation and reminded the Council that  the draft deadline of  January 2011 was not negotiable, as confirmed by Director Barnes.   
 The Council has been busy with 4 subcommittee m eetings and several conference calls that have 
been well attended.  The subcommittee members are doing very important work.  There has been a lot of interest in in stream flow and 7Q10.  Chairman Ri chardson mentioned that both he and 
Co-chair Copeland have received many form lette rs from interest groups and individuals about minimum instream flow requirements.  He stated that the Council does not have the resources or 
time to research this issue; how ever the Council can address it by include in the Regional Water Plan a statement to encourage EPD to continue  researching and reviewing its current policy on 
this issue.  He also mentioned that the subcomm ittee discussed this issue as well in their last  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
meeting and recommended this to be a topic for the upcoming joint council meeting in October.  

Chairman Richardson welcomed the newest me mber of the Council,  Mr. Gator Hodges from Butts County (who replaced former Council member Van Whaler). 
  
2) Review and Formally Adopt Council Goals   Charlotte Weber and David As hley provided an overview of the Middle Ocmulgee Council 
adopted vision and the draft goals recomme nded by the Technical Subcommittee.  The subcommittee focused on making the goals "actio nable" to support the selection of water 
management practices.  The subcommittee also trie d to clarify the draft goals to avoid future misinterpretation. 
 Bembry commented that he understood that the subcommittee's intention to set more actionable 
goals.  However, he felt the current draft goals lost an important message by omitting the phrase "Promote development patterns".  The Middle Oc mulgee region is blessed with special water 
resources and a high quality of life.  Growth  planning is important to protecting the water resources.  John recommended revising the goal to  allude to the fact that  there are appropriate 
and inappropriate places for development to occur.  
Weber responded that the goal "Promote stew ardship" was intended to communicate this thought. 
 McSwain felt that the original  goals included stronger statements  on the stewardship of natural 
resources such as promoting water conservation and maintaining the integrity of natural systems.  McSwain would like for the emphasis on stewardship  of natural resources to  be reincorporated 
into the goals.  
Chairman Richardson commented that there are a  number of water management practices (for example - protect sensitive lands) that will be  presented later in the afternoon that support 
stewardship of natural resources.  
McSwain encouraged the group to strengthen the  goals as the goals lead the selection of water management practices.  Bembry  commented that it is important to achieve a "balance" in the 
goals.  McSwain felt that reading the list of goals, they are very focused on water supply and the word "balance" will help place more priority on preservation and conservation. 
 The Council discussed the concept of "improving"  a natural system.  The intent was really to 
restore the natural system functions that may have been impacted because of human intervention.    
Dickey was concerned that the proposed langua ge might preclude the Council from considering new reservoirs, because these would impact natural systems.  McSwain responded that the added 
emphasis on natural systems would not negate the ex isting goals.  He stated  that six of the draft goals support meeting water supply needs and it seems appropriate to include one goal to support 
natural systems.  

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      2  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
Co-chair Copeland commented that the draft goal " support nonpoint source pollution by advocating better land manage ment practices" was revised by the subcommittee.  The 

subcommittee wanted to focus the goals on actions  within the Council's charge.  The Council can recommend, support, or encourage, but cannot effectively "reduce" anything. 
 Bembry recommended that "support development in  an appropriate manner" might be suitable 
language.  The Council discussed that the use of sept ic systems is a problem in some areas of the region and that the Council could  support the DCA's efforts to mi nimize septic systems without 
interfering with zoning board responsibilities.   
Briley commented that the goals of the Council s hould not be limited to th eir authorities because they are still a goal for the region.  
 Bass responded that the Regional Water Plan was  called for in State law and therefore will be a 
legal document.  The Council should not include  language that puts land ow ners' rights to water resources in jeopardy.  The Council  does not want to end up in th e same situation as Atlanta, 
facing the loss of Lake Lanier.  The Council s hould not extend their aut hority in the Regional Water Plan and should focus on policies that can be enforced. 
 Parsons commented that there was little point in  setting lofty goals when EPD seems lacking the 
staff to enforce current regulations.  She cite d the example of Monroe County developers not doing a good job on erosion and se diment control and choking th e life of streams. Ashley 
mentioned that the enforcement of erosion and sediment control is most of the times delegated to local government and not by EPD. 
 Copeland agreed that specific goals supporting the protection of natural resources were important 
and an oversight of the subcommittee.  The re commended revision "impr ove stream integrity" has been interpreted differently  by several committee members, so the recommended revision 
needs to be clarified.  
Chairman Richardson suggested changing th e goal to read, "Suppor t the protection and improvement of natural stream integrity and the recreation it provides". 
 Rojas suggested removing the word "improve" because  of concerns about the extent that others 
might envision this effort.  He advised that natural integrity is a very subjective term.  
The Council voted on removing the words "and improvement" from the revised goal.  The motion carried. 
 The Council voted on adopting the goals (see next page).  The motion carried. 
  
  
  

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      3  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Region Goals (Adopted 9.22.2010)  

\Gamma   Maximize existing water supply sources to the extent practicable. 
\Gamma   Support the protection of natural stream integrity and the recreation it provides.  
\Gamma   Promote sufficient water supply for the region.  
\Gamma   Promote efficient use of water.  
\Gamma   Promote properly managed wastewater discharges and beneficial reuse.  
\Gamma   Support the reduction of non-point sour ce pollution by advocating better land management practices.  

\Gamma   Support planning and management of water  resources to maintain  a healthy economy and ensure a high quality of life and to protect our natural resources.  
 3)  Water Usage in the Kaolin Processing Industry  
 Special guest Lee Lemke from Georgia Mining  Association gave an overview of Georgia's 
Kaolin Industry.  Randall Quintr ell, who represents China Clay  Producer Association, gave a presentation on " Water Usage in the Kaolin Industry: Water Balance Assessments and 
Forecasts".  
Question: Is the Kaolin industry increasing, decreasing, or holding steady? Response: The kaolin industry is "mature".  Their business currently varies based on the use of 
paper, which is often an indicator of the ec onomy.  There are a number of emerging industries that are likely to increase the demand for kaolin, such as ceramics and nanotechnology.  The 
kaolin industry has extens ive research laboratories that are identifying  new uses for kaolin.  The process has become more efficient over time.   
 Question: One of the arguments for increasing the  Plant Washington water use was that the 
kaolin industry would use less water in the future; is that true? Response: The kaolin industry will be here for the next 50 years. 
 Randy Quintrell gave a presentation of water us e for the kaolin industry, along with their 
definition of consumptive use.  
The Council discussed the consumptive use and return numbers presented at CM#6.  The kaolin industry is using a different defi nition for consumptive use that was developed before the State 
Water Plan.  The return flows are high beca use the kaolin industr y uses groundwater and stormwater to process kaolin and then returns that water to the streams. 
 Copeland asked the kaolin industr y representatives to stay for  the presentation on the Cretaceous 
aquifer by Dr. Kennedy.  He hopes that they will  help identify solutions  to the region's ground water resources challenges. 
 The kaolin presentation has been given to a  number of EPD leadership including Dr. Kennedy, 
Linda MacGregor, and Kevin Farrell.  
Copeland asked if the total forecasted demand for 2050 is still the projected need.   
*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      4  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
Response: The kaolin representatives responded that the original forecasts were based on employment and there is not a strong correlation between employment and kaolin water demands 

(or demands from the pulp & paper industry).   The permit applications were based on detailed business projections and the volume of water n eeded.  Each kaolin producer analyzed their 
business plan to see if it still reflected futu re plans.  The current permitted volumes are anticipated to meet the future needs.    
 Copeland asked how they could be certain that they need the water one of the two facilities in the 
region is currently not in operation? Response: There are a number of new technologies,  such as nanotechnology, that may drive the 
demand for kaolin in the future.  This facility may reopen in the future.  
Copeland commented that operati ng groundwater wells costs a lo t of money.  Using a greater percentage of reuse water from  the ponds will be less expensiv e than pumping groundwater for 
process water. Quintrell explained that because kaolin floats, the ponds need a lag time for the particles to settle.  
The facilities are recycling as much water as possible.  Energy costs drive the level of recycling.  
Bembry stated that he appreciates the industries  mitigation efforts for quarries that have reached their full potential.  He asked if the quarry sites  could also be used for drinking water reservoirs. 
If there are 100,000 acres permitted with 40,000 active s ites, what is the potential to use these impacted areas for water storage? 
Response: Quarries are typically much  deeper than reservoirs and the mining life can be 30 - 50 years.  Clay quarries could be used for water storage when they are fully mined. 
 Ray asked; are the kaolin indus try groundwater withdrawal permits  metered and for a specific 
location? Response: Yes. The permits are for specific locations with pumping limits.  They are not 
metered.  
There were additional questions on how the unaccounted for water percentage and the wastewater return ratio were calculated.  Quin trell showed a slide w ith projected 2050 demand 
and wastewater flow which showed the wastewat er flow was calculated  to be 1.29 times the water use demand.  He stated their consultant  Craig Smith who conducted the water balance 
study (and was out of town on the day of the mee ting) would be able to answer exactly how these numbers were calculated. 
 4) Subcommittee Update  
 Chairman Richardson thanked the ten Technical  Subcommittee members for their participation 
in the 4 subcommittee meetings and one confer ence call since the subcommittee was formed in May.  Ashley provided a summary of the work  from the Water and Wastewater Demand 
Forecast, Resource Assessment, and Management  Practice subcommittees.  Ashley asked if any subcommittee members asked if they had comments. 
 Rojas commented that many of the meeting materi als for the subcommittees are coming so close 

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      5  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
to the date of the meeting that everyone is reacting as quickly and thoughtfully as they can.  

Bembry mentioned that other Councils have re quested extensions from  EPD, but based on discussions with Director Barnes  this is not an option.  Bembry  is concerned about the accuracy 
of the planning data, given that there is only  one node for the region.   He recommends sending a formal letter from the Council to EPD requesting an extension and expressing concern in the data 
accuracy due to the small number of planning nodes.  
Farrell stated that the lack of l ong-term USGS gage stations is a  reality.  He suggested that the Council recommend additional gage stations in th e Regional Water Plan for the next update.  He 
added that there is no proof to lead to a conclu sion that the data is incomplete with only one planning node.  Su stated that consideration of  a new planning node below Macon discharges is 
possible using synthetic streamflow [Note from  Planning Contractor: s ynthetic flows can be derived from the closest long-t erm gage station at Macon].   Recommendations to EPD can be 
included in Section 7.4 of the draft plan.  
Chairman Richardson concluded  that the Council would send a  letter to EPD and include a recommendation for new gages and additional planning nodes in Section 7 of the Regional Water 
Plan.  
5) Review Initial Draft Sections of the Regional Water Plan   
Ashley announced that the Draft for Sections 1 -  5 have been reviewed by EPD and a list of 86 comments were returned.  Most of the comments are relatively minor and being addressed.  
 Ashley walked the Council through the submitted Plan sections. 
 Chairman Richardson commented that th e existing population numbers shown in the 
presentation did not look cons istent with the population numb ers provided by EPD.  These numbers will be checked. [Note from Planning  Contractor: Existing population shown in the 
slide was for the year 2007.  Sec tion 4 of the draft plan showed the population forecasts for 2010 to 2050.] 
 Hodges asked about the conservation storage in Lake Jackson reduces over the planning horizon. 
Ashley stated that surface water availability reflec ts the Jackson node and not just Lake Jackson.  The decrease in future surface water availabi lity is the result of the planned Newton County 
reservoir and projects in the  Metro Water District.  Reservoi rs capture flows upstream and thereby reduce downstream flows.  Increases  in water demands upstream also reduce 
downstream flows.  
It was explained that the Jackson node results re flect the demands in the region as well as those upstream of the region.  The water demands increase in the future and therefore there is less 
water available for new demands; even with new reservoir projects.  
Rojas asked about the permit numbers in Table 5-2.   It was confirmed that  footnotes associated with this Table explain the difference between river and lake permits. 

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      6  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
 Rojas commented that Sections 1 - 5 mainly  reflect information provided by EPD and was 

curious as to the nature of the comments received.  
Ashley responded that many of the comments are minor and suggested different phrasing.  
Richardson added that the information provide d by EPD was reviewed closely by the Council and any discrepancies were addressed with EPD ahead of submitting the draft.  He offered to 
share the comments with interested Council members over lunch.  
Ashley reminded the Council that Sections 6 - 8 are due October 15, 2010. CM#8 will be tentatively on Nov. 4, 5, or 10th. 
 Chairman Richardson introduced Kevin Clark  and Kevin Kelly with GEFA who joined the 
meeting.  
6) Resource Assessment Updates    
Tai-Yi Su provided an update on the surface water  quality resource assessment results.  Updated 2050 demand condition results were presented for the Assimilative Capacity for dissolved 
oxygen (DO).  She first showed the color-coded map for baseline condition and initial future assessment using full permit limit in the model.   The 2050 forecasted demand conditions added 
"planned projects" on EPD file.  The planned pr oject included "Tier 1"  projects:  Approved wastewater load allocation and projects wh ich also has a design development report, 
environmental impact document, or an anti-degrad ation report has been fi led and are considered near-term projects.  Tier 2 projects included  projects that have a  wastewater allocation 
application on file but have not  advance beyond this stage.  If  these projects do not meet the forecasted 2050 demand or if the county does not  have any planned project on file, an 
assumption was made to increase  the flow proportionally based on  the planned capacities of the planned projects, or the existing discharge quantities from existing plants. 
 The Council asked for clarification regarding the  definition of permit limits.  The permit limit is 
the concentration of pollut ants based on the highest levels in the permit.  If flows increase in the future, the facility may need to provide a higher level of treatment to meet the permit limits. 
 There were additional questions about the cha nges between the existing and future resource 
assessments.  Some streams in the region changed from "red" and "yellow" to "blue" in the Oconee Basin which reflected improvements in ex isting treatment facilities, for example the 
ongoing upgrades in Athens-Clarke  County.  There are also stream s that are not mapped in the existing resource assessments but are mapped in  the future, reflecting the construction of new 
wastewater treatment facilities.  
Mark Wyzalek (Technical Committee member from Bibb County) asked whether the models use the NPDES permit standards for summer or winter  months, where the permit values are different 
based on season.   

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      7  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
Farrell confirmed that the lower permit values were used as they are more conservative.  

Bembry asked for confirmation that the DOSAG models are based on critical conditions, or 7Q10 flows.  This was confirmed.  Wyzalek aske d for confirmation that the water quality and 
water quantity model used different critical co ndition streamflow data.  Su answered that the critical conditions for the models were defined differently. 
 Clarification was provided on the planning assu mptions for future conditions.  The future 
wasteloads were assumed to be a  value that would meet water qualit y standards.  In some cases, EPD has already asked facilities to relocate discharges and/or increase treatment levels so the 
planned improvements are in progress.  The model uses current DO standards.  
Chairman Richardson requested a break for this  presentation to allow Dr. Kennedy to present on the Cretaceous Aquifer work before lunch. 
 Su provided an update on the lake and waters hed models after lunch.  The DOSAG models are 
based on 2007 stream flow and actual discharge da ta while the lake and watershed models used data based on 7-year hydrologic and climatic  records (2001-2007).  The watershed models 
primarily look at nutrie nts, such as phosphorus  and nitrogen.  The watershed model reflects the watershed upstream of Lake J ackson.  It was confirmed that  the existing condition watershed 
models are based on current discharges and not  on the worst case permit conditions.  The lake and watershed models predicted potential violation of chlorophyll a concentration at the mid-lake 
station (current standard is 20  \Gamma g/L) and nitrogen concentration  (current standard is 4 mg/L); most of the nutrient loads (both total phosphorus  and nitrogen) are shown to come from point 
sources (from the discharges from  the Metro District].  The onl y tributary watershed to have more non-point source contribution is the Al covy River watershed n ear Newton Factory.  
Approximately two-third to three-quarter of the nutrients loads were predicted to come from point sources for the Yellow River, South Rive r and Tussahaw Creek tributary watersheds. It 
was discussed that the increase in nitrogen levels in the future is associated with a number of different sources in addition to wastewater treatment discharges, such as  fertilizer and other nonpoint source pollution.   
Chairman Richardson commented that one  of the recommendations from the Governors Contingency Task Force was to reconfigure wa stewater discharges in  Gwinnett County to the 
Chattahoochee River.  He asked what effect this action would have on the Middle Ocmulgee. Farrell responded that the nitroge n load would likely decrease but  added that the stream flows in 
the Middle Ocmulgee would also decrease.  
The Council discussed the likeli hood of maximum wastewater di scharges during the low flow stream conditions.  Farrell commented that EPD pe rmits wastewater discharges to protect natural 
resources and the basis for the permits is not likely to change.  
Farrell asked about the role of point sources ve rsus nonpoint sources in the increase in nutrient loads in the Jackson node.  
 Ashley responded that the wasteload from the  Metro Water District increases mainly from 
*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      8  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
increases in Clayton and Henry Counties.  Nonpoi nt source pollution loads were increased in the model based on land use information and existing  stream water quality data.  Su stated that 

DeKalb County discharge to the Ocmulgee Basin  was kept at 56 MGD in the model as quantity beyond 56 MGD is required to be returned to  the Chattahoochee River Basin based on the Metro 
District Wastewater Plan.  
Hodges asked if new reservoirs, like the Tussahaw, reduce the nutrient load. Response: It was explained that new reservoirs do not  change the nutrient loads in the system, 
but may retain some of the load in upstream lake s.  Farrell added that in modeling assumptions the future wastewater flows increase but the total phosphorus loads do not increase, because EPD 
will require the permit holders to reduce their di scharge concentration in the future to meet annual loading limits.  Marci  Seleb (Technical Committee member from Butts County) 
commented that there are still nutrient problems, even with the increased treatment standards.  
The Council discussed current EPD permitting pract ices.  Wyzalek commented that permits are based on discharges into a stream and not nece ssarily conditions in the watershed.  Farrell 
explained that the permits were based on the m odels and information that were available and does not see a change in EPD permitting practices.   
 Rojas expressed some concern moving forward with  the models if they are going to serve as the 
basis for future permits instead of just bein g a tool for regional water planning.  Farrell responded that the Regional Water Plans will not identify specific permit limits.  While the 
models may be used for future permitting decisions , this was a parallel process to the regional water planning process. 
 Rojas commented that previous  cost estimates at Macon Water  Authority showed that upgrading 
one wastewater treatment plant to reduce phos phorus level would cost approximately $500,000 in chemicals annually.  The annual operations  budget for the wastewater treatment plant is 
approximately $2.2 million per year.  Increasing treatment levels would create a significant long-term expense. 
 Briley recommended that the concerns in the validity of the models  be included in the plan along 
with any recommendations to the State.    
7) Groundwater Resource Assessments  Dr. Kennedy provided an update on the groundwater  availability resour ce assessments.  New 
information regarding current and future withdr awals was received in April 2010.  The new data includes final results from the agricultural fo recasts completed by Dr. Hook as well as final 
municipal and industrial demands  provided by the Council.  The current sustai nable yield for the prioritized Cretaceous aquifer was estimated  using a baseline withdrawal level of 124 MGD 
based on USGS data.  The new data shows highe r projected 2010 demands and indicated higher "baseline" withdrawal quantity.  The modeling t eam tested the sensitivity of the groundwater 
models to the changes in data and found that the  change in transmissivity associated with the new information changed the results.  Therefore,  the models are being revised for the Cretaceous 
aquifer.  

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      9  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
Transmissivity is the ability of an aquifer to  yield water, or the permeability multiplied by the saturated thickness.  The transmissivity was ca lculated based on the existing groundwater levels 

and estimated current withdrawals.  Because the  current withdrawals were  higher than expected, the calculated transmissivity levels changed.  For the Cretaceous aquifer the sensitivity analysis 
showed that the change in transmissivity cha nged the simulated drawdown from 3o feet to a few feet.  
 The agricultural demands from Dr. Hook were pr ovided in 5 ranges.  The summary considered 
both the 50% and 75% agricultural demands.  
Chairman Richardson asked what the change in  sustainable yield in  the Cretaceous aquifer means for the Middle Ocmulgee Council and specifically Peach, Houston, and Twiggs counties. 
Kennedy responded that the sustainable yield for th e aquifer will likely in crease.  The current groundwater models show that the model criterion for drawdown is the limiting parameter.  With 
the new transmissivity, the limiting parameter may be the reduction in baseflow instead of drawdown.  Until the modeling is  completed, he could not provide an estimate for the new 
sustainable yield.  
Bembry asked if the Cretaceous aquifer suffered  from sinkholes like the  Floridan.  Dr. Kennedy responded that the Cretaceous aquifer was more sa ndy versus the limestone Floridan aquifer, so 
sinkholes were not as big of a problem.  
Copeland asked about the timeline for the Council receiving results from the revised models. Kennedy responded that the results would not be available until mid-December. 
 Copeland commented that based on the map in the  previous baseline resource assessment; there 
were no areas in the Cretaceous aquifer in the Middle Ocmulgee region where the benchmark metrics showed sustainable yield issues.  Copela nd asked if it was safe to assume that if the 
sustainable yield is increasing, th at there will not be any challenges for the Middle Ocmulgee Council to address. 
 Kennedy responded that it was not a safe assumption.   If the sustainable yi eld metric is reached 
in a portion of the aquifer, the entire aquifer will  need to address the gap.  There could be a gap in the Cretaceous aquifer in the future, it just may be a smaller gap. 
 Wyzalek expressed concern in the quality of the resource assessment data as a basis for planning.  
If the new assumptions yielded such different data , would new data availabl e next year continue to dramatically revise the results? 
 Dr. Kennedy responded that the new data used wa s developed for the State Water Plan by Dr. 
Hook.  The final results from Dr. Hook's work  were not available until  April 2010 and were different from the 2009 estimates from USGS that were used in the original baseline models. The 
intensity and level of new data is not likely to occur outside of the State Water Plan effort.    
Copeland asked if the distance between the simulated wellheads was still about 25-feet apart.  Kennedy responded that the large  models use a simulated grid  and assign the demand to the 

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      10  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
center of that grid.  The regional model used a  1-mile grid.  For the sub-regional models, a 2000-foot grid was used.  In a well field design, which  is a different exercise than planning, a smaller 

grid would be used.  
Su commented that the metering data for agricultur e use is still not widely available and that was the reason the baseline withdrawal level was estimated, not meas ured.  Kennedy concurred.  The 
USGS estimates were based on talking to the farm ers.  Dr. Hook's irrigation estimates are based on measurements of the wetted acreage and the type of crops. 
 Kennedy also reviewed the resource assessment re sults for the Crystalline Rock aquifer.  He 
recommended using the lower range of sustai nable yield (0.01 MGD/s quare mile) from the Piedmont water budget sample basin for planning  purposes.  He reminded the Council that the 
sustainable yield presented for the Crystalline Ro ck aquifer is only for two sample basins.  In order to determine whether these results ar e suitable to the Middle Ocmulgee region, it is 
important to compare the stream flows in the month of September for the location in the region to those for the sample basins.   The hydrology in the drainage ba sins may not be similar to the 
sample basins.  The Crystalline Rock aquifer is a reasonable source of supply for irrigation, some industrial process water, small municipalities, or private residences. 
 Chairman Richardson commented that he wa s concerned about usi ng the 0.049 MGD/square 
mile number published in the baseline resource a ssessments because the availability of water is tied to the presence of a fracture.  Kenne dy recommended using the 0.010 MGD/square mile 
number in the baseline resource assessment to  account for the uncertain ty associated with fractures and clearly stating in the plan that  this assumes similar characteristics between the 
Middle Ocmulgee River Basin and the Piedmont water budget sample basin.  
Bass recounted a meeting with some well drille rs.  There are approximately 14,000 customers in the State that use water from the Crystalline Rock  Aquifer.  While the yields are low, it is an 
important supply to rural areas and smaller and  organic farms.  He warned that the Council should be cautious to consider these needs, and not to assume that there is no water available just 
because the yields are low.  
9) Water Management Practices  
Ashley gave an overview of the draft water  management practices list developed based on comments from the subcommittee.  A polling tool wa s used to solicit fee dback from the Council 
on the draft list of water management practices.    
Infrastructure water management  practices were not ranked by th e Council because if a utility or local governments needs water, then these manage ment practices will be a high priority and 
selected based on local conditions (generally  surface water for north of the Fall Line and groundwater for south of the Fall Line).  It was  discussed by the Council that some of these may 
be more feasible than others.  The subcom mittee recommended providing flexibility to the utilities based on local conditions. 
 Programmatic water management practices were  polled to determine their relative weighted 

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      11  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  
importance.  Each Council member gave the practic es a rank of low, medium, or high priority. An average was taken for each proposed manageme nt practice. The ranking reflects the practice 

and not the examples provided as options  of how to implement the practice  [Note: see powerpoint slides summary for ranking results].   
 Regarding the use of the Georgia Stormwater  Management Manual, Adams commented that for 
urban areas with MS4 permits, the Georgia  Stormwater Management Manual was already required for new developments.  The response wa s that this management practice could extend 
this practice to the smaller rural communities.   Planning contractor woul d modify the table to include the wording for rural areas. 
 Council members discussed that  practices to reduce runoff fr om impervious surfaces are 
expensive; cost and effectiveness should be considered for these practices.  
The Council discussed whether stormwater utilities should be a practice limited to urban areas or whether it should extend to  rural areas.  Council members adde d that in the City of Covington, 
the City was responsible for ma intenance of stormwater BMPs,  since the property owners often don't have resources or know how  to care for these BMPs (such as  stormwater ponds), turning 
them over to the government may ensure they f unction as they were designed.  These fees are based on impervious areas.  It  was discussed that population de nsity instead of population might 
be a better determination criter ia for the need for a stormwater utility.  The Council members discussed that a stormwater utility was just a method for funding stormwater system maintenance 
that was desperately needed in many communities.  
10) October 6th Joint Meeting  
Based on previous e-mail communications, the following Council and subcommittee members volunteered to attend the joint meeting: Cope land, Bass, McSwain, Ray, Hopkins, and Golmitz. 
Chairman Richardson has a conflict in the morning but plans to attend in the afternoon.  
Co-chair Copeland will participate as a pane list in the "2050 Wate r Supply Needs" panel discussion.  The Middle Ocmulgee Council also was  selected to have panel representation on the 
topic "Council Coordination" and needs one more c ouncil member to participate in the panel.  Hodges also volunteered to participate in the joint meeting with other Councils. 
 Chairman Richardson commented that the joint mee tings in the past were very informative and 
he encouraged as many council members as possible to attend.    
11) Local Elected Official and Public Comments  
Les Ager, a retired DNR employ ee provided a public comment as  a concerned citizen.  He encouraged the region to play an active role  in developing the Regi onal Water Plan.  He 
recommended the Council institute a moratorium  on additional water s upplies and withdrawals until the models are completed and accurate.  Ager's written comments are included in the 
Attachment of this meeting summary.  

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      12  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  

*Questions were asked by council members unless otherwise noted.      13 
 12) Wrap Up/ Next Meeting 
 Ashley announced that EPD has set aside $100,000 in 319 grants per  Council for priority 
nonpoint source projects.  The projects do requir e a 40 percent local match and must be for nonpoint source pollution reduction.  The Council will discuss projects to include in the Regional 
Water Plan in future meetings.  
Chairman Richardson thanked everyone for their participation and urged everyone to ask any questions. 
 McSwain asked if the presenta tions would be available to the Council members.  The 
presentations and voting will be summarize d on the Council website under "View All Documents". 
  The next meeting is tentatively planned for the beginning of November. 
 Meeting Attendees 

Council Members in attendance 
Russ Adams 
Tony Bass 
John Bembry 
Jason Briley 
Ben Copeland Jr. 
Keith Dalton  
Jerry Davis 
Robert Dickey 
Richard Haddock 
Charlie Harris 

Gator Hodges 
Larry McSwain 
Hal Newberry 
Harvey Norris 
Eva Persons 
Barry Peters 
Robert Ray 
Elmo Richardson 
Tony Rojas  
William Whitten 

Council Members not in attendance 
Blair Cleveland 
Jim Ham  
Bobby Hamby 
William Lazenby  
Paul Leath 
Jay Matthews  
Terry Scarborough 
Thomas Wicker  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  

14
 
 
Staff in attendance 
Kevin Farrell (EPD) 
Ted Hendrickx (EPD) 
David Ashley (Jacobs JJG) 
Tai-Yi Su (Jacobs JJG) 
Charlotte Weber (Jacobs JJG) 
Kim Shorter (AECOM) 
 
 Partnering Agencies and General Public  
*Adriane Wood (Department of Community Affairs - DCA) 
*Keegan Malone (Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission) 
*Jimmy Evans (Georgia DNR Wildlife Resources) 
*Karol Kelly (UGA Cooperative Extension - Bibb County) 
*Kevin Clark (GEFA) 
*Kevin Kelly (GEFA) 
*Lynn Cobb (Keep Georgia Beautiful, DCA) 
Don McGough (Georgia Farm Bureau) 
Bill Stembridge (Regional Representative for Senator Saxby Chambliss) 
Skip Langley (Regional Representative for Senator Johnny Isakson) 
Mark Wyzalek (Macon Water Authority, Technical Subcommittee Member) 
Mike Hopkins (Newton County Water and Sewerage Authority, Technical Subcommittee Member) 
Marianne Golmitz (City of Warner Robin, Technical Subcommittee Member) 
Les Ager (retired fisheries supervisor GA DNR) 
George Popham (City of Forsyth) 
Lee Lemke (Georgia Mining Association) 
Randy Quintrell (China Clay Producer Association) 
Marcie Seleb (Butts County Water and Sewerage Authority, Technical Subcommittee Member) 
Heather Duncan (Macon Telegraph) 
 
*Indicates attendee represented a partnering agency 
  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  

15
 Attachment 
Public Comment (by Les Ager) 
I've got a long history with DNR.  In 1975, I began work as a fisheries biologist with the Game 
& Fish Division of DNR and continued in a similar capacity until my retirement just a couple 
years ago.  Throughout my career and now beyond, I and most of my counterparts within WRD 
have been frustrated with the "lack of protection" afforded our aquatic systems by our sister 
division EPD.  As a regulatory agency, EPD is under tremendous political pressures to be 
industry friendly, and receives little support to be environmental friendly.  When their former 
director spoke about the current instream flow policy at your last meeting, he confirmed those 
pressures when he indicated that the choice for a minimum instream flow policy was guided 
largely by the economic impact such a policy would have on applicants and not its ability to 
protect aquatic resources.  Since its inception in the early 70's EPD's past has largely been 
marked by their protection of applicants and less with their protection of the environment.  Many 
of you are already aware of EPD's posture and that is why you are skeptical of some of the 
information that they have provided to this council. 

You are right to be skeptical.  Skeptical of the gap analysis, of the models, and of the minimum 
instream flows used to protect our wildlife.  And when your reasonable requests for credible 
information regarding instream flows was answered at the last meeting you got a watered-down 
analysis of the importance of adequate instream flow.  The WRD presentation at your last 
meeting, in my opinion, was framed to avoid your detection of the significant difference in the 
stance of the scientists within the Wildlife Resources Division (WRD) and those in the EPD, 
with regards to what constitutes sufficient protective stream flows.  WRD fisheries personnel not 
only share your skepticism, but they know from the evidence that EPD's instream flow policy is 
not adequately protective of our aquatic resources and they have been working to improve that 
policy since at least 1995, when WRD published an analysis of this issue in a report that has not 
been shared with you.   

EPD's reluctance to allow you to hear uncensored recommendations from WRD or from SEAP 
can only lead you to a single conclusion.  Their leadership has determined that the best science 
and engineering should not be used to guide the council's efforts.  I believe that is public policy 
at its worst and I think many of you do as well.  But in the face of all but untrustworthy 
information, what are you to do. 

EPD may make you write a plan within the schedule they have been given, but you don't have to 
put what they want in it.  I urge you to insist that models used to provide the projections you 
need be subject to the most transparent of independent scientific review.  Failing that, as they 
have, I believe you have an obligation to reject the finding of the unfounded models and  

Meeting Summary Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council Meeting #7 
September 22, 2010  

16
recommend a moratorium on new water withdrawals or wastewater discharges until credible data 
is forthcoming.  Compounding existing poor policy by plans that are just as flawed will not 
improve Georgia's water woes.  Remember, once the water plans are in place, it very well may 
be that the opportunity for more sensitive environmental considerations will be lost.  Once all of 
the water in a stream is allocated to other purposes, how will additional instream flows ever be 
provided, regardless of how critical that may be to protect valuable aquatic resources in some 
streams.   

Furthermore the scientific community outside of EPD is clearly united in their opposition to 
monthly 7Q10 as an option in the minimum instream flow policy used by EPD.  I think you are 
obligated to express that in your work product and to strongly urge the DNR Board to abandon 
that option for future use in both models and as new permit conditions, and to adopt the more 
favorable options already available in the current policy.  

  Clay.Zielinski 40 12 14 20 9 110 3 292 1  -14400 Georgia Department of Natural Resources MOC_CM7_Summary.pdf en Acrobat PDFMaker 8.1 for Word 