

 

Memorandum  
To: Suwannee-Satilla  Regional Water Planning Council  
From:  Rick Brown and Brian Keel, CDM  
Date: 07/02/09  
Subject:  Council Meeting 2 - Summary 

This memorandum summarizes the meeting of the Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Planning Council Meeting 2 on June 24, 2009. 
1)  Welcome and Introductions/Recap Council Meeting 1/Approve Agenda 

Chair Darvin Eason led the Council in roll call. Senator Greg Goggans gave a welcome to 
all in attendance. Council members replied that they had no trouble getting information 
and pre-meeting materials. The Planning Contractor presented a summary of results of 
the evaluation forms from Council Meeting 1. 

The meeting continued with a welcome from the Planning Contractor (PC) and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). An overview of the goals of the 
meeting was provided. These included:   

\Gamma   Finalizing the Council's operating procedures and rules for meetings. Executing 

the MOA with the Department of Community Affairs and the Environmental 
Protection Division 

\Gamma   Reviewing the population and employment forecasts and providing input on the 

developments affecting employment in the region and developments affecting 
population and housing in the region  

\Gamma   Gaining a broad understanding of Georgia's current agriculture water use and 

demand 

\Gamma   Identifying the purpose and nature of the water resource assessments that EPD is 

conducting for regional water planning 

\Gamma   Continuing the process of creating a regional vision   

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 2 

 
Results of the first meeting evaluations from Council members were presented. A brief discussion of the next meeting date and location was held. The dates available for the next 
meeting are September 8th through 25th. Council members will provide available dates throughout the meeting and the date will be scheduled at the end of the meeting. The 
proposed agenda was presented.  
A Council member commented that the Satilla River doesn't flow from Georgia into 
Florida, it flows to the Atlantic Ocean, and requested for a factual correction in the CM1 
meeting summary. The Council approved the CM1 meeting summary and the CM2 
Agenda. 

2)  MOA, Operating Procedures, and Rules for Meetings Presentation 

The Planning Contractor and EPD made a presentation on the requested changes to the 
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), Operating Procedures, and Rules for Meetings. EPD 
described the method that was followed to evaluate the inputs that were received from 
the council and review the documents. EPD recommended changes only at locations 
where there was a conflict with the State Water Plan. A short summary of the discussion is 
provided below. 

\Gamma   Rule 6:  It was decided that Decision making could be by show of hands or by 

verbal vote. 

\Gamma   If a member resigns, the Council can send a recommendation to EPD who will 

forward to appointing authority. The appointing authority is the only official that 
can make the replacement according to the State Water Plan. The Council should 
make a recommendation for replacing Linda Tanner, who resigned.  

\Gamma   An Alternate indicated that the Suwannee-Satilla Alternates have attended all 

meetings so far. 

\Gamma   Council held a discussion on what constitutes a quorum? PC Response: Quorum is 

50%+1. There are 30 members on the Suwannee-Satilla council so 16 people would 
constitute a quorum; Majority of these (9) can vote to pass an issue. So it is important to 
attend meetings to reach consensus on issues. 

\Gamma   If a Council member misses a certain number of consecutive meetings can the 

Council vote that member off? EPD Response: Based on the State Water Plan the 
Council does not have the authority to vote a member off. Suggestion was to have Chair or 
Vice-Chair contact the Member if they miss two consecutive meetings and ask them to  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 3 

 
resign if they find no valid reason. The general rule of thumb for the Council would be not 
to include this as a hard and fast rule in the MOA documents, but the Council would use 
discretion to decide and let the Chair and Vice-Chair communicate. 

\Gamma   Could the Ex-officio members ever vote? EPD Response: No. 
\Gamma   A Council member mentioned that one of the major drainages in the region is the 

St. Mary's River and asked to add St. Mary's to Council name. EPD Response: The 
official Council name is already finalized in the State Water plan. As long as Council 
considers the water body in the plan, the prominent rivers do not have to be included in 
Council name.  

\Gamma   Page 4 of MOA a Council member noted that the historical flows and capacities of 

the state's water bodies (rivers and aquifers) matter as much as what's going on 
now. A suggestion was made to change "current" to "current and historical". EPD 
Response: Historical flows and capacities will be represented in resource capacity models. It 
was noted that unimpaired flows will be included in the resource assessments. 

\Gamma   Property Rights must be respected. 
\Gamma   There was discussion of the status of MOA approval at other Council meetings.  

Most Council's to date have passed MOA - Lower Flint and perhaps one or two 
others have not. 

\Gamma   Some Council members suggested that the Council wait to talk to Dr. Couch in the 

meeting with Chairs and Vice Chairs on July 13th.  

\Gamma   The Public Attendees introduced themselves. Council discussed approval of the 

MOA. 

\Gamma   Council voted to table the vote on passing MOA until the end of the meeting. 
3)  Resource Capacity 

EPD gave a presentation on Resource Capacity to show how gaps between demands and 
capacities can be eliminated by reducing demands and/or expanding resource capacities. 
The following questions/comments were addressed: 

\Gamma   If we end up with a large capacity in any of the region will it end up being utilized 

by another region? EPD Response: It could conceivable be used by other regions but that  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 4 

 
would likely be a Council decision. It could be a possible inter-Council discussion issue that 
EPD would help facilitate. 

\Gamma   How are we going to handle the influence on how inter basin transfer is going to 

be done in 20-50 years. Is it going to be free? PC Response: First step to think about is 
will the Council be interconnected to other regions, either by surface water and/or ground 
water. Later this year or next year there will be inter-Council meetings and it would be 
great to start anticipating which Councils would have the maximum effect on the 
Suwannee-Satilla Council, from employment and growth perspective, surface water , and 
ground water aquifers. 

\Gamma   Is our and other water Councils' ability to implement some of these changes open 

to discussion? EPD Response: When you are deliberating any issue about which you need 
to talk with another Council the first step would be to define what you need to talk about. It 
will eventually happen that specific issues will become topics that will need to be discussed 
with other Councils. 

\Gamma   How will the downstream effect on other states be handled or are we not going to 

worry about this issue? EPD Response: We will discuss Georgia issues now. EPD is also 
in discussion with other states regarding data sharing and data collection with respect to 
resource assessments. It's possible that the interstate process might lag a little but it is 
gearing up, especially right now with discussions with South Carolina on forecasting. 

\Gamma   We are talking about a plan in 2011, so do we have the time to get all information 

for our plan? EPD Response: For Coastal Georgia, Upper Savannah and Upper Ogeechee 
EPD is in talks with South Carolina for data as the river is a shared resource. EPD is also 
discussing data with Florida and their management districts. EPD is handling the talks 
with the neighboring states. 

4)  Population and Employment Forecasts 

David Tanner with the Office of Planning and Budget (OPB) gave an introduction. Warren 
Brown with Carl Vinson Institute of Government (CVIOG) introduced himself and gave 
an introduction of the 5 population projection scenarios. Jeff Dorfman with CVIOG 
introduced himself and gave an introduction of the employment projections. The 
Planning Contractor gave a presentation and explained the importance of the input from 
the Local Government Advisory Board and Council members and why EPD needs input 
on projections. The input may help in finding fatal flaws in projection or major issues that  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 5 

 
affect projections. The following questions/comments on methodology and preliminary 
results were discussed: 

\Gamma   Employment to Population ratio for Suwannee - Satilla seems to change between 

2000 and 2050? CVIOG Response: Ratio actually does not change much. 

\Gamma   Only 5,000 employed in Agricultural and Forestry jobs in Suwannee - Satilla? 

Seems like there should be more. CVIOG Response: These are GA Department of Labor 
counts wouldn't reflect jobs not reported to state. 

\Gamma   Coffee and Tift counties - Why does Coffee catch and surpass Tift County? CVIOG 

Response: Historical rates of net migration. Follow-up question: Could it be because of 
the way population/employment data is distributed to counties in region? CVIOG 
Response: Employment is not projected for counties specifically, just regions. Regional 
relationships between employment and population applied across region; then historic 
growth used to allocate growth across counties. 

\Gamma   For the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) are we 

using same methodology as in other regions? CVIOG Response: Yes in general terms. 
MNGWPD is taking data but maybe applying it differently. 

\Gamma   In Tifton 67% of people that work in certain places don't live in Tift County and 

this might be effecting population projections. Need to look at this regionally. 

\Gamma   Why is the biggest employment growth concentrated in the Government Sector? 

CVIOG Response: It is the fastest growing sector in the state in all regions. Federal 
government is creating more and more jobs. In Georgia public schools K-12 are also 
counted as government. 

\Gamma   A higher percent (44%) of forecasted new population is employed than the existing 

population? CVIOG Response: Based on increasing total job/population ratio over 50-yr 
term. 

\Gamma   What is the margin of error in 2050? CVIOG Response: For population forecasts this is 

not known, not statistically derived. Employment projections are still not completed, 
should be approximately around 5-6% 

\Gamma   CVIOG: If rates of rapid growth from 1990 are used to project, rates are probably 

too high. If rates of low growth from 1980 - 1990 are used to project, rates are 
probably too low.  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 6 

 
\Gamma   Why is the line flat around 2040? CVIOG Response: Originally population projections 

only went to 2040. Extending this forward to 2050 resulted in some issues that need to be 
reevaluated. It was noted that CVIOG is hosting series of projection workshops in each 
region in fall and will review figures in 2yrs (late 2011). 

\Gamma   Are employment populations based on state-wide trends or region-wide trends? 

CVIOG Response: Region-wide. Exception in retail and wholesale where state trends were 
also taken into consideration. 

\Gamma   PC: The most important point is to plan for big picture and not exact numbers. 
\Gamma   PC: If we plan for the absolute worst we won't end up with a good plan. 
\Gamma   It would be helpful to see summaries for other regions, especially in adjacent 

zones. PC Response: Planning Contractor will e-mail this information. 

\Gamma   Moody Air force Base in Lowndes County, Where is that information captured? 

PC Response: Group quarters populations (i.e., prisons, military bases) are calculated 
differently than residential populations that are detected by the US Census. 

\Gamma   Are people going to move to north of Atlanta where there is no water or move to 

south Georgia where there is water? Move industry here and don't send water 
there. EPD Response: Forecasting is based on trends; the trend is not to move where water 
is. 

\Gamma   The State needs to encourage growth in areas that have more abundant water 

resources. EPD Response: You should reflect that in your plan. 

\Gamma   The Vice Chair previously called Dr. Couch about getting Agriculture Permit unit 

of EPD to move permit to South Georgia, from Atlanta; Dr. Couch agreed to it and 
implemented it. Vice Chair also agreed to previous comments about encouraging 
growth where water is. 

\Gamma   The Planning Contractor emphasized the importance to submit feedback forms to 

state website. Please send substitutive methodology comments to us directly. 

\Gamma   Following the discussion of Population and Employment there was discussion of 

the next meeting. Dates and locations for the next council meeting were discussed. 
September 18th was ruled out. The 16th of September presented a conflict for the 
Vice Chair. The 9th or 23rd of September were agreed as good dates.  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 7 

 
\Gamma   A Council member recommended The Inn at Bacon County and commented it 

would be nice and spacious enough to accommodate 70 people. 

5)  Introduction to Agriculture Water Demand Forecasts 

Cliff Lewis, Assistant Branch Chief, EPD presented an overview of Agriculture Water 
Demand Forecasts for the Suwannee-Satilla Region. The following questions/comments 
from Council were addressed: 

\Gamma   Most surface water withdrawals are on small streams. There are more GW 

withdrawals than surface water because it's a more reliable source. 

\Gamma   Agricultural permits are based on maximum pump capacity, not actual volume 

withdrawn. 

\Gamma   Data being used in forecasts comes from wide variety of reliable sources. 
\Gamma   If user is selling water, does this need to be metered. EPD Response: You need to 

think about the selling of water as a Council. 

\Gamma   Is the State putting meters on withdrawals so they can charge for withdrawals? 

EPD Response: No, the meters are put on to monitor permitted systems. Data used in the 
agricultural forecasts cannot be traced back to individual permittees; not used to set permit 
limits. 

\Gamma   If a farmer is deciding on surface water versus ground water, he can get a surface 

water withdrawal for irrigation for less than 9 acres; any more than that and he 
needs a US Army Corp of Engineers Permit. Can we dispense with the 
bureaucracy that accompanies surface water permits? EPD Response: This is outside 
the Council's scope, but EPD would be happy to talk to you one-on-one regarding this 
issue. 

\Gamma   Do we have projections on expanding farm land for future food projections? EPD 

Response: This is something the Council needs to think about for the region. 

\Gamma   Agriculture is a major water user, but how does it compare to residential 

development? EPD Response: We need to see other water uses for other land uses. The 
numbers for per capita water use will come from municipal and industrial projections. 

\Gamma   Where do we get numbers on permits issued for industrial, municipal, agriculture, 

etc. water use? EPD Response: These will be provided in future council meetings.  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 8 

 
\Gamma   Agriculture forecasts don't include special crops like peaches and blueberries and 

vegetables, but specialty crop acreage was included in the baseline acreages of
the agricultural forecast. 

\Gamma   We have to consider food safety for food crops. Wells have less chance of 

contamination than surface water. 

\Gamma   What percent of permitted pumps have been metered? EPD Response: About 60%. 
\Gamma   A comment was raised regarding permitting of portable pumps. EPD Response: The 

State will drop off a meter fitted to your portable pipe. 

\Gamma   Cotton, corn, soybean, and peanuts constitute 70% of all GA crops; add pecans and 

those all constitute 80-85% of all GA crops. 

\Gamma   How do we incorporate technologies that haven't yet been perfected, such as 

Ethanol production, Biomass plants? EPD Response: You have local knowledge of your 
regions and you have to make decisions based on this knowledge. 

\Gamma   Glen Behrend at EPD is managing forecasts. Are there other water intensive 

energy productions in State? EPD Response: Council members should report a large 
water use facility, something like a biomass plant, if they know about anything like that. 

\Gamma   It seems that there should be ways to reward industry and people that have 

reduced their footprint? EPD Response: These mechanisms exist on local scale, not with 
EPD. Other Council members noted that we are doing this for the sake of future 
generations not rewards. 

Donny Smith was introduced to the Council.  Mr. Smith is the Agricultural liaison to the 
Governor and he thanked the Council for their service and effort to help put together a 
local and state water plan. 

6)  Modeling and Resource Assessments 

The Planning Contractor presented an overview of modeling and resource assessments.  

\Gamma   Will modeling be done for the 5 scenarios shown in this presentation? PC Response: 

Not necessarily, Council will have to pick appropriate scenarios based on the area.  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 9 

 
\Gamma   What is the scale of GW assessments? Is it based on county boundaries? PC 

Response: Assessments are based on resource boundaries. The level of detail will need to be 
developed and will likely be a challenge. 

\Gamma   Assessments will be finished by fall, available at the beginning of 2010. 
\Gamma   Several years ago TMDLs were developed on rivers where the causes of 

impairment were natural. Point sources have largely been improved. Non-point 
sources could be human or background. Look at land uses around impaired water 
body and try to infer sources. 

\Gamma   EPD will see if providing TMDL formulation information to Council would be 

helpful in future meetings. 

\Gamma   In modeling consider most recent science on black water (water containing high 

level of tannins that alter water chemistry; common of surface waters in 
Suwannee-Satilla region) as we will have to deal with this problem. Is it a flow 
problem as opposed to point sources or NPS? 

7)  Visioning 

The Planning Contractor presented ideas to help the Council build on creating a regional 
vision. The presentation provided additional insight into the interrelationship between 
visioning, goals/objectives and the selection of water management practices. The 
presentation also built on the trends, forces and factors work that was completed at 
Council Meeting 1. The following questions/comments from Council were addressed: 

\Gamma   The Planning Contractor will assist the Council in writing the plan but the 

Council's plan must be based on the vision, goals/objectives that the Council 
identifies. 

\Gamma   What needs to be protected and why does it need to be protected? 
\Gamma   E-mail will be sent to Council reminding them to complete their homework 

assignment. Trends, Forces and Factors results will be included. 

\Gamma   Property rights are very important. 
\Gamma   It is important to clearly articulate what is important to the Council.  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 10 

 
\Gamma   It's clear that Council's role is to develop regional plan but remember we want a 

plan that works for the state as a whole; the State's Plan and Policy are not 
separable. 

\Gamma   Will the opportunity to access and evaluate statewide policy be afforded? EPD 

Response: Yes if it is relevant to your water planning needs. 

\Gamma   Will there be a designated place where we can submit these issues? EPD Response: I 

think so, for example policy encouraging moving to water rich areas. 

\Gamma   EPD: Remember your charge isn't to revise law, but don't lose the thinking process 

that might lead to a better solution and bring it forth in the plan. 

\Gamma   We need an organized process for advocating changes. 
8)  Public Involvement Plan 

\Gamma   The Public Involvement process has been more passive, meaning the public is 

being asked to keep informed of the process by visiting the water plan website and 
attending Council meetings. 

\Gamma   EPD wants the process to be more proactive. Suggestions included maintaining 

open meetings, working on getting word out on meeting announcements through 
press releases. 

\Gamma   EPD will come up with a plan in the next few weeks. 
\Gamma   Some Council members' constituents are asking EPD about the process. 
\Gamma   The Council should see the information before disseminating it to the public. 
\Gamma   Maybe send information to Chambers of Commerce for dissemination. 
9)  Agenda Item 2 Continued - MOA, Operating Procedures, and Rules for Meetings 

The Chair asked Council members to reinitiate discussion of the MOA, Operating 
Procedures, and Rules for Meetings.  A Council member expressed his view that it might 
be good to wait to learn if and/or why other Councils may not have signed the MOA.  
Another Council member indicated that, we as Council members know why we are here 
and that the documents are pretty straight forward and we could wordsmith these 
documents for a long time or get on with the work that is ahead of the Council.  The Chair  

Suwannee-Satilla Council Meeting 2 Summary 07/02/09 
Page 11 

 
called for a motion.  Scott Downing moved to sign the MOA and the motion was 
seconded by Ben Copeland/Grady Thompson.  The motion passed by majority vote with 
4 dissenting votes. 

10) Local Elected Official Comments 

There were no local elected official comments. 
11) Public Comments 

Brian Taylor of GA Agribusiness Council mentioned about the Water Conservation 
Implementation Plan, a 187-page document, is currently in its second draft. He requested 
the Council to read through the document and submit comments to EPD by July 31st. The 
third draft will reflect the comments. 

One example of a possible issue is the idea that USGS considers all irrigation as 
consumptive use and this is not correct, so this needs to be considered in water budgets. 

Planning Contractor will email Council with a reminder and link to the website: 
www.conservegeorgia.net 

Mike Copeland with the GA Farm Bureau thanked the Council for their service and 
mentioned to let him know if his organization could help in any way. 

12) Wrap-up and Next Meeting 

Council agreed to hold next meeting in Bacon County on September 23rd, 2009. 
13) Council Meeting 2 Evaluations 

The Planning Contractor distributed two sets of evaluation forms and all members of 
Council filled out the forms. The Planning Contractor collected the forms. The Chair made 
the closing remarks and adjourned the meeting.  

    
 cc: Jeff Larson, EPD 
    Cliff Lewis, EPD  

Suwannee-Satilla Regional Water Council
Council Members Attendance List

1 Joseph L. Boyett X
2 X
3 William L. Brim X
4 Hanson  R.  Carter X
5 Carroll H. Coarsey X
6 Ben  Copeland X
7 Scott Downing X
8 Eugene Dyal X
9 Darvin  Eason X
10 Michael E. Edgy
11 Greg C. Evans X
12 Greg Goggans X
13 Jim Hedges
14 Alva Joseph Hopkins X
15 Donald A. Johnson X
16 John Wesley Langdale X
17 X
18 R.R. Rusty McCall X
19 Donald H. McCallum X
20 Dan Raines X

Suwannee-Satilla Council Member 6/24/2009

Earl Brice

Joe Lewis
20 Dan Raines X
21 Scotty Raines X
22 S. Gordon Rogers X
23
24 Frank G. Sisk X
25 Miles A. Stone X
26 Linda Tanner
27 Grady M. Thompson X
28 Doyle Weltzbarker X
29 James R. Willis X
30 Jackie Wilson X

Totals 26
Public Attendance List

1 Mike Copeland X Ga Farm Bureau
2 Brittney Foster X Packaging Corp.
3 David Mairelin X Ga Farm Bureau
4 Jason Mallard X GSWCC
5 Bryan Tolar X GA Agribusiness Council
6 X GSWCC

Totals 6
Rahn Milligan

Public Attendee 6/24/2009 Representing

Jay Shaw Keelbj 38 40 13 7 6 109 2 187 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - Suwannee-Satilla CM2 Summary Memo.doc SSA_CM2_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2 