

1

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  

  
March 18, 2011  
M E M O R A N D U M  
 TO:   Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Council Members  
     FROM:  Bill Martello & David Ashley, Jacobs Engineering 
 SUBJECT: Meeting Summary 
    Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Plan  Council Meeting 9 
 CC:    Jeff Larson, GA EPD 
    Brian Baker, GA EPD Bill Martello, Jacobs 

David Ashley, Jacobs   Inga  Kennedy, PEQ 
      
     Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan 

Regional Water Planning  
Meeting Summary  
Meeting Date:  March 18, 2011 Location:    Talk of the Town Cafe'; Washington, GA 
 1) Introductions  
Ron Cross, Chair thanked Mike Eskew with the City of Washington for hosting the meeting.  Mayor Burns of the City of Washington welcomed  everyone to the City and thanked the Council 
members for their efforts.  The City of Washi ngton has two water plants that withdraw water from the Savannah Basin.  These plants are bein g upgraded at a cost of $9 million, funded by the 
SPLOST and support from GEFA with no additional  city tax revenues.  Mayor Burns thanked the Council for their efforts and encouraged ev eryone to enjoy their visit to the City of 
Washington.  
Ron announced that Bill is retiring with his last full day being April 15, 2011.  David Ashley will  

2

be taking on the role of working with the Sa vannah-Upper Ogeechee Council.  Bill commented that there was still great continuity on the project because the two have worked closely as David 
was leading the Middle Ocmulgee efforts.  Bill expects to complete the first draft prior to retirement. 
 There was a count of Council members in attend ance. There were 17 members which constitutes 
a quorum.  
The meeting attendees introduced themselves.    
2) Comments from the Chair  Ron noted that he had received several comm ents on the Draft Regional Water Plan from 
Council members and agency staff.  For example, it was mentioned that future water needs and biomass would need to be added to  the report.  Biomass to genera te electricity is probably more 
important in the southern counties and the Plan should account for cooling water.  Ron asked to note where in the report this should be added.  The Planning Contractor (PC) noted that there is a 
section on energy generation that would account for biomass.  There was a comment from the Council that there are other types of biomass fac ilities that could also use significant amounts of 
water (growing algae, ethanol, etc.).  The Coun cil commented that Section 8.3 does cover the future water needs associated with biomass fac ilities.  There was a recommendation that biomass 
facilities be specifically identified in the list of future energy uses for water.  
Ron mentioned that the purpose of this meeting is  to review and discuss the final draft Regional Water Plan for submission to EPD.  The Council s hould be satisfied that  the draft is ready for 
submission by the end of the meeting.  This will  be the last planned m eeting aside from a public meeting, unless there are changes from EPD that merit an additional meeting. 
 The PC reviewed the meting agenda: 

-  Discuss the committee activities -  Review the revised goals 
-  Draft plan review & concurrence -  Schedule for completion 
-  EPD has established $100,000 in Section 319(h ) grants for a project selected by each Council. The City of Augusta has submitted  a 319 grant project proposal and no other 

communities have recommended a project.  Th e PC suggested that the Council consider recommending the City of Augusta's 319(h)  grant project to EPD. A motion was made, 
seconded and unanimously approved.  
3) Committee activities  Tom Wiedmeier chaired the Technical Committee  and gave a brief report.  The Technical 
Committee has provided significant i nput and feedback on the current draft.  Tom added that the committee focused on the gaps identified by the  resource assessments and management practices 
to fill the gaps.  There are two sets of recommendations in the Draft Regional Water Plan.  Table 6-1A includes measures that are mandated by Stat e Law and/or those to address gaps.  There is a 
second tier of suggested management practices  that are good practices  that everyone in the Council should consider.   
 The PC added that the tables in Section 6 have  been reconfigured from the original December  

3

2010 draft.  The Council wanted to prioritize the ac tivities, so that 6-1A  includes these priority practices.  Table 6-1B presents the measures that are good practices.  It is likely that the practices 
in Table 6-1B will be re-evaluated during the first plan update in 5 years.  Table 7-1 shows the parties responsible for implementing these mana gement practices.  The  draft Regional Water 
Plan also includes an implementation schedule and benchmarks for evaluating progress.  
Ron asked if the Council members had any specif ic comments and/or concerns.  None were expressed. 
 Bruce Azevedo chaired the Plan Review Committee and gave a report.  This committee reviewed 
the format and flow of the draft plan.  Th e committee focused on ensuring that the Regional Water Plan was easy to read by the general public. 
 The PC reminded the Council that this is the Regional Water Plan "Version 1.0" and that it 
provided a great starting point to the future.    
Scott MacGregor chaired the Interstate Coordination Committee and presented his report.  There has been a great deal of interaction with Sout h Carolina.  He thanked Scott Willett from South 
Carolina for being in attendance today.  South Ca rolina is modeling their water planning process on the efforts in Georgia.  A Council member stated that it was important for Georgia to continue 
working on issues and avoid conf licts with South Carolina.   Several Council members warned that the focus should remain on water supply planning and not get derailed by the Savannah 
Harbor and other issues.  Ther e is an ongoing committee composed  of representatives selected by the Governors of South Carolina and Georgia to work on water issues.  The committee will 
meet in the next 2 months and the hope is th at the Savannah Harbor issue does not impact the ongoing coordination related to water issues.  EP D noted that the coordination with SCDHEC 
and SCDNR has been very productive and helpfu l.  South Carolina di d not have detailed forecasting data, but EPD worked with SC to deve lop water use projections to include into the 
resource assessments. EPD stated the coordination process will continue.   
Council members reported that the only legislativ e issue that is likely  to be adopted by the General Assembly is the public-private partnership (PPP) legislation to  support reservoirs (SB 
122).  The IBT legislation will likely not pass.    
4) Revisions to the Goals  The Chair and the PC presented the changes to  the goals included in th e draft Regional Water 
Plan.  
Goal #2 Discussion Goal number 2 was previously "Prohibit interbasin  transfers".  EPD has requested that this be 
revised as it is in conflict with State Rules.    
Proposed: "Provide support for current state laws  regulating interbasin  transfers in OCGA 12-5-584(f) and OCGA 12-5-31 and further descri bed in EPD Rule 391-3-6-.07.  Promote the 
development of a comprehensive evaluation pro cess that protects donor basins from adverse impacts from proposed interbasin transfers between State Water Planning Districts." 
 The Chair stated that this is a very important  part of the Council's Regional Water Plan.  The  

4

Council needs to be comfortable that the language is clear and strong enough.  The Chair commented on the difference between "should" and "shall" in terms of the review of the impacts.  
The Council strongly encourages the assessment of all impacts.  
The PC commented that the new DNR Board rule s state that the Dir ector of EPD "should" review this.  There is a proposed  legislation to change that la nguage to "shall".  There was a 
comment that the flexibility in the regulations a llows relief for a small scale transfers with no impacts.   
 A Council member added that the Council's view wa s somewhat addressed in the last sentence.  
A Council member suggested adding the word " mandatory" prior to "comprehensive evaluation".  There was agreement that the Council needed to emphasize the word mandatory.   
 There was concurrence that adding the word  mandatory addressed the concern.  There was a 
motion and a second.  The vote was unanimous.  
There was a comment that the goal says "current law" .  If the rule changes to allow the transfer of water from the Savannah Rive r that would present a problem.   Change this statement to 
"current (2011) law" to make sure it is a snapshot in time versus something that could change.  
There was a question whether this was needed or  not, because there is an adoption date for the Plan.  There was another comment that the C ouncil will have to comply with State law 
regardless.  The Chair was concerned that statemen ts may be taken out of context in the future.  The Council concurred that there was no reason  not to include the date 2011.  There was a 
motion and a second to add (2011).  The vote was unanimous.  
Revised: "Provide support for curren t (2011) state laws regulating  interbasin transfers in OCGA 12-5-584(f) and OCGA 12-5- 31 and further described in EP D Rule 391-3-6-.07.  Promote the 
development of a mandatory comprehensive eval uation process that prot ects donor basins from adverse impacts from proposed interbasin transfers between State Water Planning Districts." 
 Goal #7 Discussion 
Goal #7 previously stated "Form a permanen t Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Council as the conduit for bringing together all stakeholders a nd assisting the State with implementation of 
water resource goals."  
Proposed: "Form a SUO regional wa ter planning organization to  coordinate water resource management issues in the basin." 
 EPD may not be able to financially support any ongoing work and asked that the word "Council" 
be changed to the word "organization".  The  Council asked if the Lower Savannah has a similar recommendation.  The PC responded that the Co astal Council has a similar recommendation.  
The PC also commented that  the Middle Ocmulgee also had a  similar goal but it was more generic. 
 The Chair asked if the Council f eels that the organiza tion should continue a nd/or combine with 
another group.  The Council asked what the Chair meant by "combined".  The Chair thought that involving the County Commission Chairmen and  City Mayors would help with implementation  

5

and future funding.  Several Council members  felt that, moving forward, the SUO Council and the Lower Savannah River portion of the Coasta l Council should work t ogether, and therefore 
the goal should share similar language.  The issu es throughout the Savannah basin are shared so the language should be in common.   A comment was made that the revised goal uses the word 
"basin" which could include the upper and lower portions of the Savannah basin.  
There was a recommendation that the Director of  EPD meet with the chairs for all of the Councils to determine the best path forward for the existing Councils.   
 The PC added that the state is  concerned about funding ongoing effo rts.  The Chair stated that 
engaging the elected officials w ould allow the new organization to  leverage funding.  A Council member commented that the Council had invested significant effort into the Regional Water Plan 
and was concerned that EPD wo uld misinterpret the Council 's recommendations.  At a minimum, the Council should be available  to respond to EPD questions and provide 
interpretations where needed.  
The Chair suggested adding language that stated that the "original Council" would be part of any new organization.  The Council re commended using the original language but substituting the 
word Council with the word organization.  That addresses the Council's continuity concerns.   
The Chair asked if there should be continuity be tween this Council and a ny future organization. A Council member concurred that this was an important concept.  The Chair suggested adding an 
additional sentence that stated  that some form of the Council  should continue.  The Council member concurred that this was important. Ther e is a lot of instituti onal knowledge that would 
be lost if this organization was passed to the elected officials.    
A member of the Forestry Commission commente d that the Upper Ocon ee Council stated that they would like to retain 6 to 8 members of  the existing Council into  any new organization.  A 
Council member recommended 25%.  There was a discussion on the percentage of the Council members. 
 A Council member recommended "As a further goal,  maintain one-third of the current Water 
Planning Council members on the following organiza tion."   There were questions from the Council regarding whether this  group would assist with imple mentation, as the Council was 
really an advisory body.    
The Council felt that the language still didn't capt ure the "entire" basin concept.  There was a suggestion to add the word "entire" in front of th e basin.  There is a way to help the state find 
funding for ongoing Council support.   If the Council chairs  can agree on a future organizational structure, the state would likely find funding to help support ongoing efforts. 
 Additional suggestions from the Council include d changing the language to read "Savannah and 
Ogeechee basins".  There was also a comment to change the language to "grandfathering" instead of "maintaining". 
 Revised: "Form a permanent Savannah and Ogeechee water planning organization as the conduit 
for bringing together all stakeholders and a ssisting the State with implementation of water resource goals in the  entire basin.  Grandfathe r one-third of the curr ent Water Planning Council  

6

on the permanent organization."  
The motion to approve was made and seconded.  The motion was unanimously approved.  
5) Proposed Section Changes   
Section 3 changes:   Most of the edits were suggested by the Wildlife Resources Division (WRD).  Information was provided regarding  streams designated as "f ishing" and additional 
information was provided on trout streams, endangered fish recovery programs, and the presence of rare mussel species.  This language has been reviewed by the committees.   
 There was a motion to approve the revisi ons and seconded.  The motion was passed 
unanimously.  
Section 4.4 changes :  The thermoelectric power forecas ts were edited based on additional information on the statewide use of electrici ty. Future planning for new power generating 
capacity should consider the Savannah basin.  Additional withdrawals should evaluate the downstream impacts.  Although electr icity needs will incr ease across the state,  it is not clear yet 
where new power generating facilities will be located.     
A Council member asked if the revisions included  Council Member Pat Goren's input.  It was confirmed they did.  It was s uggested that language be added  to require the impacts of any 
proposed thermoelectric projects be considered pr ior to permitting.  The PC read the specific language from this section.  The Council recommended that the statement " prior to permitting " 
be added at the end of the statement.    
There was a motion to approve the amended language and the motion passed unanimously.  
Section 5 & Section 7 changes :  EPD has refined the groundwater availability models since the previous version of the draft Plan.  The section  was modified to reflect  the new modeling results 
which show that there is water available in the Cretaceous Aquifer.  
Section 5.2 on surface water availa bility now includes a better discussion of 7Q10 in terms of flow regime gap.  There is a discussion of the Corps lakes evaluation and Phase 2 of the 
Savannah River Basin Comprehensive Study (Com p 2).  The section states that adaptive management strategies that minimize the use of  conservation storage are preferred.  The gap 
analysis at the Little Tennessee node was update d based on new modeling  results that better reflect how water is used in the basin.  There is  still a gap, but it is mu ch smaller than it was 
previously.  Figure 5.1 was revised to reflect these changes.    
A Council member has some concerns regarding  the language for the Corps that was suggested on page 7-13.  There are  specific recommendations to the state and EPD.  He is uncomfortable 
with #5 where it suggests that the Corps  look at reducing the minimum flows because downstream communities rely on  the 3,600 cfs flows and all of th e impacts would need to be 
considered.  Stating such a specific recommendation without additional study may not protect all downstream uses.  The intent of the language was to re-evaluate the drought management plan 
and the minimum release flow to optimize storag e, looking at lower flow releases during the cooler months and establish a downstream indicat or, such as DO, to serve as the basis for  

7

releases.  However, reevaluating this flow target it already encompassed in the recommendation to reconsider the flows in the basin.  Othe rs Council members concurred.  Several felt that 
including this statement in the Regional Water  Plan would give the pe rception that the Council supported lower releases without a full evaluati on of downstream impacts.  There are other 
factors besides DO that should be  considered.  The PC noted th at the TMDL for the harbor, water supply, DO, minimum instream  flows, flood control, etc. would  all need to be considered.  
It was also noted that this statement only  addresses the economic im pacts to those on and upstream of the Lake, but it should consider all economic impacts, both upstream and 
downstream of the dams.    
A Council member stated that the Corps doesn't  know what the correct DO should be and agrees that we do not know what number to recommend.  He  asked if the Council  agrees that the issue 
needs to be studied further so that the economic  impacts are appropriately defined.  The Chair recommended "continue to evaluate the releas es below Thurmond dam" because the releases 
fluctuate during different times of the year.  
The Chair asked if the Council needs to add a s uggestion that the Corps  consider raising the normal pool at Hartwell and Thurmond for additiona l storage.  This woul d be normal pool, not 
just the winter pool, to increase storage.  He  suggested that #2 should be changed to be more similar to #5, to be more consistent.  Basically, #2 should be changed to remove the numbers. 
  EPD would like to share the Council's language  with the Corps as soon as possible.  The 
language deals with minimum flow s but does it affect pulses a nd other considerations.  EPD commented that the Nature Conservancy was  working with South Carolina.  The pulsing 
considerations may be part of the Comp 2 study,  although it is currently not in the work plan.  Currently the Corps is looking at  the drought contingency plan.   Minimum flows  might not be 
related to drought.  The Corps will look at bot h upstream and downstream economic conditions.  The Council should mention any considerations  they would like the Corp s to address in the 
Regional Water Plan.    
A Council member commented that the ecological pulses don't appear to  be covered in the current language.  A Council member recomme nded that the language be changed to say 
"appropriate flow releases".   This language would cover everyt hing including the seasonal need to support ecological flows during spawning.   
 We want to address the minimu m flow concerns, understanding th at the ecological issues will 
also be considered.  EPD commented that a dding the word ecological may help address the concern.  Revise the text to  consider further economic and  ecological impact studies.  For #4, 
need to make sure that the downstream economic  and ecological impacts are studied in addition to those related to lake leve ls. A suggestion was made to  revise the language to read 
"communities that have devel oped around the Corps projects an d downstream in the Savannah basin".   
 The Council recommended changing #5 to read "C ontinue to evaluate the current minimum flow 
release below the Thurmond dam w ith considerations of the ecological impacts."  Then it was recommended to have a separate bullet for ecological impacts like the separate bullet for 
economic impacts.  The Council also recommende d removing the word minimum, because it is possible that sometimes there s hould be a maximum limit.  A  Council member commented that  

8

we should show that the ecological issues are important to the Council within this Plan.  
A Council member recommended  "Re-evaluate the current minimum flow during drought periods" with an additional bullet on ecological issues. 
 In Section 7, add "7. Continue to evaluate th e ecological impacts of a ny modifications to the 
management operations strategy".    
Section 7.4 Recommended Changes: 2. Evaluate potential revision to  the rule curves for Lake T hurmond and Hartwell.  Evaluate 
whether the pool elevations could be beneficially raised. 4. Consider further economic impact studies an d protection of the econo mic well being of the 
communities that have developed both around the Corps projects and downstream in the basin as one of the goals of those projects. 
5. Continue to evaluate the current minimum flow release below Thurmond dam.   7. Continue to evaluate the ecological impact s of any modifications to the management 
operations strategy.  
Also in Section 7, the Chair mentioned that there was a suggestion to add a recommendation to the state that the development s hould be focused where there are ad equate resources.  If Kia can 
be constructed on the Chattahoochee River,  then opportunities should be pursued in the Savannah basin.  "The State shoul d consider and encourage econom ic development activities in 
areas with adequate resources."  
The PC stated that goal #1 was to plan for sufficien t resources to meet future economic needs.  It was suggested that the new sentence be added to this goal. 
 Goal #1 Revised : "Plan for sufficient water supplies to support planned economic development 
while providing residential, industrial, agricultural, recreationa l, and utility services in a sustainable manner.  Request that the Stat e consider and encourage future economic 
development in areas with adequate water resources."  
The motion to make the changes to Sections  5 & 7 were made, seconded and unanimously approved. 
 Section 6 proposed changes:   The priority management practices  were re-configured into four 
categories (Water Demand Management, Wa ter Supply Management, Water Quality Management, and Educational Initiatives).  The applicable areas were added to the table. 
 The motion was made, seconded, and Section 6 was unanimously approved. 
 Section 7 proposed changes:   In addition to the previously discussed changes, the 
implementation table was changed to match the revision to the measures.  No substantive changes were made, only organizational changes. 
 The motion was made, seconded, and Section 7 was unanimously approved. 
 The PC also noted that the Cretaceous aquife r modeling work that was previously recommended  

9

has been completed, so this work was removed from the recommendations table.  
Section 8 proposed changes:  Table 8-1 was revised to be consistent with the changes in Sections 6 and 7.  The final paragraph at the end and future organization will need to be modified 
based on the change in goals today.  Identical language will be incorporated into the text.  
An editorial note was made: WD-2 thermoelectri c power generation, add the open parenthesis in front of the word "including" and delete the comma. 
 The motion was made, seconded, and Section 8 was unanimously approved. 
 6) Next Steps  
The PC commented that the Draf t Plan is located on the EPD  website and showed the Council how to download information from the State Water  Plan website.  The new  revised Plan plus the 
supplemental documents (7 or 8 technical memorandums) will be published on the website.  The new draft should be on the website in approximately 2 weeks from today. 
 This draft is scheduled to be submitted to EPD  in April.  EPD will put the plan out for public 
comment in May.  The Council will hold a Public  Information Meeting that will include a power point presentation that Council Members could use for additional outreach.   On May 9, 2011 the 
draft Plan will be available for public comment.   The Plan will be posted for a minimum of 45-days.  The comments will be addressed in the September timeframe. 
 The Chair has asked for a one-page summary of th e Regional Water Plan with bulleted items for 
the Council use.  He believes there is a good stor y to tell--few gaps a nd effective recommended management practices. 
 The PC gave an overview of the public information meeting.   

-  Target attendees include the municipality a nd utility managers who are responsible for implementation in addition to state repr esentatives, DNR board members, elected 

officials, etc.  The PC asked if there were others to include.  The Chair suggested that everyone should be invited. 
-  The Chair stated that the meeting should be  in a central location, such as Augusta or Thompson.   
-  The Chair recommended that the Council members  sit at the front.  He does not want the elected officials to lead the discussion but rather be in attendance.   
-  The Chair suggested an informal presentati on with opportunity for  questions from the public for the Council members to answer (wit h the support of the PC ).  The Chair also 

suggested that some copies of the Plan be available.   -  The Chair suggested that inv itations be sent directly to  the City Mayors and County 
Commissioners and they decide who should  attend.  The invita tions should request RSVPs so the room is arranged based on the number of attendees.   
-  It was suggested that outreach to the agriculture interests be extended through the Soil & Water Conservation Commission.   
-  A press release should be publ ished ahead of time that show s the link to the Plan on the website.   
-  The PC recommended the beginning of April (following the Masters) for the meeting.  Many schools end in mid-May and several C ouncil members suggested that the meeting  

10

be prior to the end of school.  The Council re commended meeting at the end of April or early May.   
-  The Chair asked whether the meeting should be from 10am to noon or from 5 to 7pm and then suggested late afternoon.   To respect the Council memb ers and attendees that need 

to travel, a start time of 5pm and end time of 7pm was recommended.   -  The Council recommended the Savannah Rapids as a meeting location.   
 The Chair and PC will address the details related to the public meeting.   
 The Council asked if there would be an opportunity for public questions.  It was clarified that the 
meeting is a public outreach and education meeti ng and not a public hearing, but there would be opportunities for questions.  The PC added that th ere will be an opportunity to comment through 
the public comment period.  A Council member noted  that the first week of May is a good time for the public meeting as it is  close to the time th e draft Plan will be available for public 
comment.    
It was recommended that an opportunity be given to make changes from the Plan based on public input.  The Chair felt that an  amendment could be made but only  if there was something critical 
that needed to be changed based on public comment.   
The Chair asked for a final motion to approve this draft with the changes approved today.   A motion was made, seconded, and unanimously carried. 
 6) Public Comments- None 
 The Council thanked the Chair for his personal commitment and leadership to this process.   
 David Ashley with Jacobs Engineering will be taking over for Bill Martello when Bill retires in 
mid-April and added that if the Council has any concerns about the draft Plan when it is published on the Council web site, they should contact him and he will make sure the necessary 
corrections are made.  
Meeting was adjourned at approximately 11:30 a.m.  
Lunch was provided.  

11

CM#9 Meeting Attendees  
Council Members in attendance 
Ron Cross, Chair 
Bruce Azevedo 
Braye Boardman 
Don Dye 
Mike Eskew 
Dan Fowler (Alternate) 
Patricia Goodwin (Alternate) 
Toye Hill 
Robert Jenkins 
Tom Jordan 
Scott MacGregor 
Chris McCorkle 
Tim McGill 
Stan Sheppard 
Lee Webster 
Tom Wiedmeier 
Tenia Workman 
 
Council Members not in attendance Jerry Boling 

Charles Cawthon 
Deke Copenhaver 
Barry Cronic 
Pat Goran (Alternate) 
Larry Guest 
Ralph Hudgens (Ex-Officio) 
Eddie Madden 
Tom McCall 
James H. Newsome 
Charlie Newton 
Lewis Sanders 
Larry Walker 
 
Staff in attendance Jeff Larson, EPD 

Brian Baker, EPD 
Bill Martello, Jacobs 
David Ashley, Jacobs 
Inga Kennedy, PEQ 
Kim Shorter, AECOM 
 

  
Partnering Agencies in Attendance  Robert Amos, Georgia Soil & Water Conservation 
John Colberg, Georgia Forestry Commission 
Patti Lamford, Georgia DNR, Water Resources Division 
Adriane Wood, Department of Community Affairs 
 
General Public in attendance 
Ed Bettros 
Dennis Black, Georgia Farm Bureau 
Nancy Bobbitt, Sen. Isakson's Office 
Sam Booker 
Frank Carl, Savannah River Keeper 
Doug Fulle, Oglethorpe Power Corporation 
E. Scott Miller, MEAG Power 
Scott Willett, Anderson Regional Joint Water  casey.porter 57 48 16 5 3 111 2 94 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - Meeting_Summary_Savannah Upper Ogeeghee_CM9_040511.doc SUO_CM9_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2 