

1

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 

Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 

Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 FAX: 404/675-6247  

  
June 23, 2009  
D R A F T  M E M O R A N D U M  
 TO:   Council Members  
     FROM:  Jeff Larson, GA EPD 

Bill Martello, JJG  
SUBJECT:  Council Meeting 2 Summary     Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council 
          
Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan Regional Water Planning 
 Council Meeting 2 Summary 
 Meeting Date:  June 17, 2009 
Location:    Cateechee Golf Club, Hartwell Georgia Attendees:   See list 
 1) Welcome and Council Member Introduction  

Ron Cross, Council Chairman, welcomed ever yone to the meeting and thanked them for attending. Council members, EPD staff, planning  consultants, partnering agencies, and other 
attendees introduced themselves.    
2) Agenda and Council Meeting 1 Minutes  
Ron Cross presented the revised agenda for the  meeting to the Council for approval.  A motion and second were made to adopt the agenda  without modifications.  No discussion was 

forthcoming and the agenda was approved as presented.    
The meeting summary for Council Meeting 1 was  distributed during the  sign-in session.  This presented the council members who had not reviewed the meeting summary an opportunity to do 
so and comment on the meeting summary.  There were no comments.  
Bill Martello (Planning Contractor Council C oordinator) recapped the key goals for Council Meeting 2.

  

2

 3) Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), Operating Procedures and Rules for Meetings  
Jeff Larson (EPD Assistant Branch Chief) presen ted the proposed changes that were captured and submitted to EPD for review.  EPD then  evaluated and concluded all recommendations 
could be and were accommodated for the Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Council. Council can have further discussion on proposed changes, or can accept and sign. 
 Chairman Cross requested a motion to approve changes incorporated in the MOA.  A motion and 
2nd were made.    
The MOA was PASSED unanimously, and  the MOA document was passed around for signatures.  Twenty one signatures were obtaine d during the meeting. Chairman Cross will send 
an email to the council members not present asking them to sign the MOA at Council Meeting 3.  After the missing signatures have been collected a signed copy of the MOA will be distributed to 
the entire council.  
4) Planning Process Overview  
Martello gave the Planning Process Overview presentation.  No questions were asked.  

5) Population and Employment Projections 
Martello delivered the Population and Employm ent Projections presentation.  The population projections are not EPD's, but from the Governor's Office of Planning and Budget (OPB), which 

contracted with the Carl Vinson Institute of Gove rnment (CVIOG) at the University of Georgia, and will be the new official State forecasts.  They are to be finalized by mid-August. 
 Chairman Cross noted to the council that th e date to submit comments regarding growth 
projections has been extended from June 12th to June 30th.   
Question - Can a list be sent to the council of everyone that received the disc/information? Response:  The introductory DVD was sent by EPD  to Mayors or Commission Chairs on the 
mailing lists of Association of County Comm issioners of Georgia (ACCG) and Georgia Municipal Association (GMA).   The DVD also was sent to al l the members of the Water 
Planning Councils.    
Question - Why is there a sag in year 2040 in all the population graphs?   Response - That is a question to ask Dr. Brown when  he joins in a conference call later in the 
morning.  All comments on population and empl oyment forecasts are due to EPD by June 30, 2009.   
 Question- Why are the Regional Development Center s (RDCs) data/responses different than 
those of the EPD? Response - That is a question for Dr. Brown.   The EPD data may be more current than 
projections done by the RDC's.  
Question - Who should respond/address the growth projections? Response - If you are a member of the council or  have received a letter/disc then you should  

3

respond.  
Question - Are types of jobs being predicted? Response - Yes (in the Employment projections). 
 Comment - Ron Cross voiced his concern that grow th has been well documented for 25 years 
with a consistent track record.   The projections appear to be si gnificantly lower than historical growth. 
 Question - Where was the slide for Stephens County? 
Response  - The slide was missing by erro r.  (Note: Bill  Martello will pr ovide the population projections chart to Don Dye - Council member from Toccoa-Stephens County.) 
 Comment - It appears that everything  goes up with the exception of  textiles.  These projections 
would be challenged. .  
Conference Call with Dr. Warren Brown   A short break was held, following which, Warren Brown joined the meeting by telephone confer ence call. Warren Brown joined UGA in January 
2009, from Cornell University.  He gave a detailed  overview of the process.   This process used trends from both the 1990s (between 1990 a nd 2000 census) and sinc e 2000, and was based on 
models developed by the University of Texas-San Antonio.  
The workforce projections were developed using confidential data from the Department of Labor in 50 different industry classifications.  They started with a  statistical model that included 
recessions and expansions; this model was then  expanded to include regional, state-wide and industry trends.  The model was adjusted to keep growth from getting too high and to account for 
the current economic situation  for 2008 to 2010.  Finally, adjust ments were made to retail employment upward in the far future to match population projections. 
 Brown explained the alternative pr ojection scenarios.  S cenario 1.0 indicated th at the rate of net 
migration from the 1990s would continue thro ugh 2040, which was the lim it of University of Texas-San Antonio study.  The 2000 to 2007 Scenario  was adjusted based on trends for the first 
seven years of 2000s.  Scenario  0.0 included no net migration, a nd was included for analytical purposes.  The Scenario 0.5 assumed half the mi gration rate from 1990 to 2000.  The workforceadjusted scenario ties total popu lation growth to jobs growth (the population projections were dampened to match the projected  employment growth).  The dip is  a function of the transition of 
the two time periods that needs to  be addressed.  There is no such  precision as implied from this dip. 
 This evaluation is completely based on past tre nds and does not consider a water shortage or 
other major limitations to growth.  That ne eds to be added from  Councils/EPD/planning consultants. 
 Process for input of local knowledge: Please complete the forms provided and return to 
planning consultant or via EPD website as well as regional planners in your community. http://georgiawaterplanning.org/pages/forecasting/population_and_employment/june_30_deadlin
e_for_input.php   

4

 Question - Can CVIOG explain why the projection for Columbia County is listed at 110,000 but 
Columbia County projections show growth at 143,000 in the year 2050?   Response - A growth rate this high is hard to expl ain and especially hard to maintain. Numeric 
is more accurate than a percentage over time.   The sum of county population equals to state totals. Totals must be defendable.  An estim ated year 2050 population of 16 million has been 
listed for the State of Georgia and provisions are likely to increase.   
Question - Is the final total going to be the state total backed out to the county projections?   Response - The county projections will be combined to develop the State totals. 
 Question - Charlie Newton of McDuffie County asked  what ground rules and  factors were used 
for projections. Response - Demographic trends, survival, fertility and migration.  The economist Dr. Jeff 
Dorman from UGA developed the workforce a nd employment projecti ons.  Other factors included adjusted population with employment  outlook, aging population, a nd attractiveness of 
the region (for retirement).  
Comment/Question- Madison County commented that thei r concentration was on the number of request for water and sewer lines being installed. RDC projected 89,000 + for growth and your 
projections are 33,900. Why are RDCs projections so much higher? Response - This is the reason we are requesting feedb ack. We may be consistent with trends but 
we may also be missing major development informa tion.  While we are tryi ng to be strict with defining development - development should already be in the pipeline. 
 Question - Are you dealing with RDC regarding th e projections or goi ng in a different 
direction? Response - Yes, we have asked RDC for feedback. 
 Question - L. Walker of Rabun asked if CVIOG is looking at employment projection for textiles 
which are extremely low.  However, pulp and  paper projections are high. Has the information been shared with the forestry department? 
Response - We will speak to the folks in forestr y. Tenia Workman gave the contact name of Bob Israel at the forestry department as she felt Bob would bring life to the data. 
 Question - There is high growth along the Intersta te 85 corridor. Projections don't seem to 
indicate this growth, are you waiting on this information from the council? Response - The population information was gathered from the Census.  Two areas of 
information not counted or factor ed into the equation  is (1) seasonal and (2) secondary homes.  Trends are driving these projections as well.  If  projections have not shown up to date then the 
information is not included. If there are specifi c projects taking place this information should be submitted by the council. 
 Question - Where decline is shown in population for Elbert County, what is the reason for this? 
Response - The way the demographics were put in it  shows as a decline in areas where growth is low but shows an increase in larger areas. 
 Question - What is the percentage of error in the study year-date?  

5

Response - Currently this is not known.  
Question - Is the key to the exercise that inform ation provided back to CVIOG will influence the data? 
Response - Yes, but feedback will not guarantee the final information will make everyone happy.  The main purpose is to look for gaps. 
 Comment/Question - Projections given are  based on historical data. Does this mean you must 
know if the lots have been platted? Should it be distinguished between platted and lots for sale? Response - Yes, information will be distinguished  by building permits and census identifying 
occupied housing.  
Question - Council members have been tasked  with getting information by June 30 th, 2009 with soft spots mentioned.  Will the council be able to review this data prior to submitting feedback? 
Response - Yes, but what the council needs to understand is that the current timetable and contract for CVIOG is with the Office of Pl anning and Budget. The population projections will 
be used for many entities in the future (funding  for transportation, hea lth care and education etc.). There will be workshops with RDCs and ot her State partnering agencies in the Fall to 
further improve the forecasting process.  CVIOG is planning on updating the projections every two years. 
 Question - When do you project getting the forecast completed? 
Response - By mid or end of August.  
6) Agriculture Water Demand Forecasts 
Cliff Lewis of EPD gave the Agricultural Water Demands presentation, with the following questions were posed by the group: 

 1.  Is there any data that suggests how many inches of water are required (for irrigation)? 

\Gamma   There is not a comparative narrative in this forecast. UGA has analysis for this and Dr. Gill Landry should be contacted for this information. 
  2.  What percentage is surface water and groundwater for permitting? 

\Gamma   It's 50/50 - fall lines are more towards surface water with a trend moving toward ground water over the past ten years. 
  3.  Are aquifer levels measured and is there a stress on it? 

\Gamma   Yes, the monitoring has mostly been done by USGS and their data is utilized in conjunction with others 
4.  Are there restrictions on agriculture? 

\Gamma   Yes, mainly in the Flint River Basin.  At one point there was a six-year moratorium in that area. Also, agriculture permits are not issued based on 

capacity. 5.  Will this presentation be on the website? 
\Gamma   Yes.   

6

7) Modeling 101 
Bill Martello presented the modeling introduction information.  Models are developed to simulate real-world systems 

 Question - Since we are in a recession and people have left, are any charts going to take this 
information into consideration? Response - Yes.  The current recession has been incorporated into the workforce and 
employment projections.  
Comment - The UGA percentage of error is needed by the council so that it may be incorporated into the council's calculations. 
 8) Resource Assessments 

Bill Martello went over the resource assessment presentation.  
Question - Are the tools/models being used by Georgia consistent with those of South Carolina?   Response - The modeling tools used by Georgia are consistent with what is being done in South 
Carolina.  Modeling tools for the Savannah River Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDL) are being jointly used by both Georgia and South Carolina. 
 Question - Are tools being used on the main stem compatible with those not being used on the 
main stem?  Response - Yes. 
 Question - When will EPD provide a range of discharge allocations? 
Response - The council should be given this information in October/December timeframe.  
Comment - Chairman Cross addressed the council asking them to keep in mind a document will be available for the council to say yea or nay. If there is a nay there must be another 
solution/agreement in place to submit to the lawmakers that Dr. Couch will be meeting with.  
9) Creating a Regional Vision 
Bill Martello presented an assignment on regional vision for council members to complete for prior to Council Meeting. 

 Question - Will the economic value brought to an area regarding lakes be discussed? 
Comment - A grassroots effort is being put together to determine this information.  People want it to be cost shared.  How does the drought contingency plan need to be changed? Quality of life 
- if lakes are full and flooding begins - this aspect must also be taken in to consideration.  
Question - Is there data available for droughts, hurricanes, and floods? Response - This data is available from USGS and NOAA. 
 Question - Is there a model for distributing water w ithin individual basins? Will this be looked 
at? Response - EPD sees this as a second part of the Water Council mission.  

7

 Comment - The non-permeable area affecting groundwater recharge is only at 25 percent. The 
most influence is the recharge area.  We need to know what it is and how to take charge of it.  If it is sealed off it is going to influence what is available for recharge. 
 Response - Jeff Larson stated that the State Geologist are overseeing a study along with a 
consultant to determine the groundwater availability.  
10) Public Involvement Plan 
Martello discussed the status of development of the public information program by EPD.  

11) Local Elected Officials Comments  
Larry Guess, Mayor of Elbert was present and commented that he felt "we need a level playing field".  

 12) Public Comment  

\Gamma   Is there a watering restriction on lawns? In Columbia County 11 million gallons per day (mgd) is used in the winter; 31 mgd is being used during the summer.  31 mgd is 

recommended to be used for Columbia County. 
\Gamma   Diverting water will only increase the need for water in Atlanta 
\Gamma   Permitting of water should not exceed quantity available during droughts  
\Gamma   Biomass electricity and fuel uses a large amount  of water.  Asking that all regions look at this. This trend will create new demands. 

 13) Meeting Wrap-up  

\Gamma   Calendars for September 2009 were distributed to the Council to aid in scheduling the next meeting.  EPD's goal is to have the next meeting between September 8 and 18. 
\Gamma   Request to repair the website so that the council can access links. 
\Gamma   Council members to return questionnaires to CVIOG at UGA by the deadline or via website  

http://georgiawaterplanning.org/pages/forecasting/population_and_employment/june_30_deadline_for_input.php 
 
\Gamma   Council would like to know what the desired outcome should be for the CM3 (preliminary agreements/accomplishments) 

\Gamma   Council would like to receive presentations in advance  
Meeting was adjourned by 3:30 p.m.
  
  

8

Meeting Attendees  
Council Members in Attendance 
Ron Cross, Chair 
Scott MacGregor 
Tom Weidmeier 
Deke Copenhaver 
Bruce Azevedo 
Braye Boardman 
Don Dye 
Jerry Boling 
Charlie Newton 
Chris McCorkle 
Ralph Hudgens 

Pat Goran 
Lee Webster 
Tenia Workman 
Stan Sheppard 
Larry Walker 
Dan Fowler  
Barry Cronic 
Larry Guest 
Robert Jenkins 
Tom Jordan 
Tim McGill 

 
Council Members Not in Attendance 

Charles Cawthon 
Mike Eskew 
Patricia Goodwin (Alternate) 
Toye Hill 
Eddie Madden 
James H. Newsome 
Lewis Sanders 
Tom McCall 
 
Staff in Attendance 

Jeff Larson - EPD 
Bill Martello - JJG 
Marla Greene - JJG 
Inga Kennedy - PEQ 
James Davis - PEQ 
 
Partnering Agencies and General Public  

Jon Huffmaster - Georgia Farm Bureau of Macon 
Deatre Denion- State Department of Community  
Dennis Black - Georgia Farm Bureau of Macon 
Robert Amos - Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission - Athens 
Peyton Sapp - University of Georgia 
Jim Hussey - Senator Saxby Chambliss Office 
Amanda Wrona - The Nature Conservancy - Savannah 
Frank Carl - Member of the Public 
Sam Booker - Member of the Public  

9

 Summary of CM2 Evaluation: Information Needs 
Council members were asked to complete an information needs evaluation form to answer questions to 
help target the information that EPD develops to assist them in the selection of water management 
practices that would meet the goals for the Middle Ocmulgee Water Planning Council. 
 
Question 1: First, consider your personal level of knowledge about the following topics.  Please circle the 
number that indicates how much you know about each topic, with 1 indicating very little and 5 indicating 
a great deal.  
 
Results:  The results show the average of the 21 Council Members who completed the form. 

Topic  Average 

Ways to protect groundwater resources in your planning region  3.29 
Ways to protect surface water resources in your planning region  3.48 
Ways to protect water quality in your planning region  3.43 
Ways to restore water quality in your planning region  3.05 
Water chemistry with respect to water quality  2.52 
Sediment and erosion rules and management  3.33 
Stormwater primer & innovative technology/practices  2.95 
Agricultural water use in your planning region  3.19 
Energy water use in your planning region  2.86 
Energy water use around the state  2.86 
Industrial water use in your planning region  3.10 
Municipal water use in your planning region  3.29 
Per Capita water use in your planning region  2.76 
Outdoor water use in urban areas and conservation methods  2.95 
The results show that based on the averages that the three topics that Council members feel that they have 
ample knowledge of include: 
 

1.  Ways to protect surface water resources in your planning region 
2.  Ways to protect water quality in your planning region 
3.  Sediment and erosion rules and management 
 
  

10

The result show that based on the averages that the three topics that Council members feel that they are 
lacking knowledge of include: 
 

1.  Water chemistry with respect to water quality 
2.  Per Capita water use in your planning region 
3.  Energy water use in your planning region 
 
Question 2: Which of these topics will be most important for your Council as a whole to explore? Please 
select the five topics that you think will be the most important for your Council to consider. 
 
Please rank your five choices from most to least important using 1 to indicate most important and 5 to 
indicate least important: 
 
Results:  

Topic  Average  Number 

of votes 

Ways to protect groundwater resources in your planning region  2.57  7 
Ways to protect surface water resources in your planning region  1.94 16 
Ways to protect water quality in your planning region  2.93  14 
Ways to restore water quality in your planning region  3.50 4 
Water chemistry with respect to water quality  N/A  0 
Sediment and erosion rules and management  4.00 6 
Stormwater primer & innovative technology/practices  3.00  2 
Agricultural water use in your planning region  2.89 9 
Energy water use in your planning region  3.00  5 
Energy water use around the state  4.50 2 
Industrial water use in your planning region  3.56  9 
Municipal water use in your planning region  3.75 8 
Per Capita water use in your planning region  2.75  4 
Outdoor water use in urban areas and conservation methods  3.25 4 
Other:  N/A  0 
 
 Note: Not all Council members completed Question 2 correctly; therefore, the results for Question 2 do not include three Council member's results, as they did not appear to be completed correctly.  In 

reviewing the results of question #2, it was difficult to qualify the actual topics that are the most 
important because of the different responses.  Some of the above results had one vote, while others 
had 12.    

11

 Using the both the average and the overall number of votes, the top three topics that will be most 
important to the Middle Oculmugee Council are as follows:  

1.  Ways to protect surface water resources in your planning region. 2.  Ways to protect water quality in your planning region. 
3.  Agricultural water use in your planning region.  
Question 3: Are there planning efforts in other states or other parts of Georgia that you are aware of and 
think we should factor into our process? 
 

\Gamma   Salt River Project in Arizona 
\Gamma   South Carolina 
\Gamma   Use in Atlanta 
\Gamma   Forestry BMPs  

Question 4: Are there particular management practices or issues not listed above that you want to explore? 
 

\Gamma   Tributaries 
\Gamma   Irrigation Pilot Program being conducted by Nature Conservancy in southwest Georgia 
\Gamma   Protecting recharge areas of aquifers 
\Gamma   Stream Buffer 
\Gamma   Ways to develop surface water supply 
\Gamma   Water Conservation 
\Gamma   Groundwater recharge area protection 
\Gamma   Flood Control  

 CC:    Tai-Yi Su, JJG 
     Inga Kennedy, PEQ   casey.porter 16 22 11 28 9 109 3 300 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - Meeting_Summary_Savannah Upper Ogeeghee_CM2_ 102809 _revised_.doc SUO_CM2_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2 