

Georgia Department of Natural Resources 
Environmental Protection Division, Watershed Protection Branch 
4220 International Parkway, Suite 101, Atlanta, Georgia 30354 
Linda MacGregor, P. E., Branch Chief 404/675-6232 
FAX: 404/675-6247  

 
  April 11, 2010 

 M E M O R A N D U M 
  
TO:   Council Members       
FROM:  Jeff Larson, GA EPD Bill Martello, JJG 
 SUBJECT:  Council Meeting 5 Summary 
    Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council      
     Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Plan 

Regional Water Planning 
Council Meeting 5 Summary 
 Meeting Date:  March 25, 2010 

Location:    Richard B. Russell State Park    2650 Russell State Park Rd 
          Elberton, GA 30635 Attendees:  See list 
 (1) Welcome and Introductions 

Chairman Cross welcomed everyone.  He as ked guests and public attendees to introduce themselves. 
 (2) Updates from the Council Chairman 

Chairman Cross reviewed a meeting he had wi th EPD Director Alle n Barnes.  Mr. Cross indicated that Mr. Barnes and he  discussed South Carolina's pot ential allocation of the Total 
Maximum Daily Loading (TMDL) in the Savannah  River.  Mr. Cross said that a plan for  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

2 
sharing the TMDL will be done jointly with Ge orgia and South Carolina.  Jeff Larson noted that South Carolina is working with EPD to fi nd a TMDL allocation th at both states can live 
with.  
Mr. Cross gave an update on the progress of the Governor's Task Force.  The latest Task Force meeting dealt primarily with conservation.  During the current legislative session, a bill 
was passed establishing new water conservation  standards and incentive s including toilets, showerheads, daytime watering, and separate wa ter meters for apartments.  Mr. Cross noted 
that interbasin transfer legislation is not likely to be passed this year.    
EPD has done extensive resource assessment c oncerning surface water availability.  There is no negative gap shown at Lake s Hartwell, Russell or Thurm ond, meaning that with current 
permitted withdrawals, there is plenty of wate r in the basin to meet demands.  Mr. Cross expressed that while this is good  news, the concern is more than  just for the total amount of 
water, but also what the lake level must  be for these demands to be met in a drought condition.  The EPD model assumes full use of  the conservation pool.  No minimum lake 
level was established for the conservation pool.  If economic development were included as a consideration, then the future condition would  become a different scenario.  Under current 
drought conditions, the worst-case is 13% reserve in Thurmond and 37% reserve in Hartwell.  The conservation pool at Thurm ond extends to an elevation of  312 ft.  The council needs to 
consider what elevation is a sa tisfactory level.  What is the  minimum point at which meeting water quality during a drought should be weighed against protecting future economic 
development?  

1.  Council asked what the lowest point reac hed during the most  recent drought was.  (315 ft-msl in Clarke Hill). 

 2.  Council asked if there are any studies on  the impact of lake levels on economic 
development.  He expressed  concern about wildlife habitat  with lake level being too low.    (The USACE indicated that the Stro m Thurmond Institute at Clemson 
University is conducting an economic study  and is gathering data for Georgia and South Carolina, hoping to produce a correlation between lake levels and economic 
impact at Hartwell.  The next meeting related  to that effort is at Clemson University on Friday, April 16th.) 
 3.  Council suggested that based on water availability and projected usage, the council 
produce a set of steps to take to meet dema nd in 2050; however, it is also desirable to maintain the economic viability of the lake s, meaning there shou ld be two sets of 
recommendations.  Chairman Cross concurred.   
Chairman Cross showed to the  council the profile view depict ing how the reservoirs "step down" and he recommended that everyone find a nd observe it online.  The profile is located 
here: http://water.sas.usace.army.mil/dams/dams1Z.htm. 
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

3 
Mr. Cross observed that the Task Force bill does not prohibit interbasin transfers, but it puts a lengthy review process onto them  which is better than current  law.  Jeff Larson mentioned 
that EPD can grant an interbasin transfer by public notice according to the Georgia State Water Plan, adopted in 2008, which was produc ed under state law and approved by the state 
legislature.  Chairman Cross noted that the ge neral complaint has been that EPD could grant an interbasin transfer without  any public input, which is a main  concern of Tom McCall.  He 
noted that current legislation prohibits interb asisn transfer into the Metro North Georgia Water Planning District.  The bi ll under consideration right now  would potentially create a 
process for allowing such transfers.  
Concerning funding and government involveme nt, Mr. Cross noted that because the transportation sector is still suffering budget shortages due  to the poor economy, there may 
be little government funding available for water  issues.  The best thing to do at the present time may be nothing and to rely on the law prohi biting interbasin transfers into the Metro 
North Georgia Water Planning District.  
Chairman Cross commented that the next c ouncil meeting may need to be on a schedule shorter than 3 months.  A goal ove r the next 45 days is to take  the forecasts presented today 
to technical and local experts each council  member must speak w ith and return with comments.  The next time the council convenes  those figures will be considered final and a 
vote may be considered to adopt the revised forecasts so the Council can move forward.  

1.  Council noted that it was heard that forecast s would not be complete by this council meeting.  ( The demand forecast is not necessarily complete because input is needed.  

Council members must consult with their experts or constituents to reach a conclusion on the acceptability of the fore casts.  OPB has published the official 
population forecasts through 2030.  They have also provided EPD population forecasts through 2050 for the  purposes of this study.   The planning contractor 
provided handouts of population forecasts through 2050 to the council.)  
2.  Council member asked whether the council  would reach a recomm endation at this meeting.  He noted that whatever threats  exist for the water of  the Savannah-Upper 

Ogeechee Region are going to be economically driven.   (A dual recommendation will likely be needed.  Bill Martello noted that different water availability scenarios would 
be reviewed later on in the day.  The Corps  must operate reservoirs to meet multiple authorized purposes.  Chairman Cross not ed that the Savannah-Upper Ogeechee 
Region is the only planning re gion that showed no negat ive gap on its reservoirs.  Even though the positive situation is not satisfactory as far as lake level, the 
Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Region is still in a better position than the other regions.)   

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

4 
(3) Municipal and Industrial Water and Wastewater Forecasts 

Bill Martello announced that later on, Matt Ha rper from the Metro North Georgia Water Planning District would be presenting on wate r planning issues and lessons learned.  Bill 

stated that there are 9 months left to get a dr aft water development and conservation plan to EPD.  The schedule is very aggressive, and fi nalizing the water and wastewater forecasts is 
critical to plan development.    
Draft Municipal and Industrial Forecasts  
Population and preliminary water and wastewater  forecasts were provided in the pre-meeting packet.  Bill Martello presented an overv iew of population forecast for the Region.  The 
Region currently has a population of 600,000 people,  which is projected to grow to 1 million by 2050, approximately a 1.5% per year growth ra te over the next 40 years.  The average 
growth rate for Georgia is projected to be  1.8% per year.  The bulk of the growth in the Region will be in Columbia and Richmond Countie s.  Bill Martello stated that comments on 
population projections should be directed towards OPB.    

1.  Council member noted that Oglethorpe Count y is going to triple in population while other counties were losing population.  He  asked whether or not the assumptions or 

data were available on how those projections were reached.  ( OPB has revised the population based on comments re ceived since its initial  release of draft population 
forecasts in June 2009.  Any information  request and comments should be directed toward OPB.  Chairman Cross urged that  concerns about the population projections 
should be addressed expediently.)  
2.  Would the projections be updated using the 2010 Census Data?   (Population projections are tentatively scheduled to  be updated on a 2-year cycle.   The 2010 

Census is likely to be available for the next cycle of population updates.)  
3.  Council remarked that smaller counties may be hurt by this methodology because population drops indicate less water use while agricultural demands in the county will 

remain the same or increase.   (Agricultural water uses are being forecasted separately, as are industrial and energy wate r use projections.  Municipal water uses 
trend with the general population, but indus trial uses do not.  Agricultural uses (irrigation uses for major crops) have been projected by UGA and are available 
online.  Energy water use forecast is being developed by EPD in a joint effort with power companies in the State.) 
 4.  Council asked what the break-point should be  on considering an industry to be "light 
industry" and be lumped with municipal de mands or heavy and projected separately as an industrial demand.   (EPD has identified 13 North American Industry 
Classification System code industries t hat are being handled separately.  These industries use more water for their pro cesses and therefore are considered major 
water using industries.)   

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

5 
5.  Planning Contractor commented that these water use forecasts are for planning purposes, not for permitting. 
 Municipal Water Demand Forecasts 
 Planning Contractor gave an overview on forecast methodology and pres ented the initial and 
revised per capita water use rates for th e Savannah-Upper Ogeechee counties.  She emphasized that municipal demand here includes  residential, commercial and light industrial 
water demand.  She encouraged input from council members if anyone should have additional feedback.  An outreach effort wa s made from October to December of 2009, 57 
utilities (or municipalities) in the Region  were contacted via e-mails and phone calls; questionnaires were sent regarding water use an d wastewater assumptions.  Eighteen utilities 
responded, resulted in revision of per capita wa ter use rates in half of the Savannah-Upper Ogeechee counties.  It was learned through that e ffort that there is no t a high awareness of 
the regional water planning effort that is taking  place, especially among the smaller utilities.  Help from council members is needed to fill the gaps in the per capita water use calculation 
and other assumptions for the forecasts.      

1.  Council observed that the table in the slid e does not match the table in the pre-meeting agenda packet.   (Only the revised per capita  rate is in the pre-meeting 

packet.  The presentation shows both the initial and revised per capita water use rates.) 
 2.  Council asked whether or not the water  use rates include in dustrial data.  ( It depends 
on the classification and size of  the industries.  The per c apita rate can include usage from many small industries.  However, if an  industry obtains water from a municipal 
water provider and belongs to one of the 13  categories, it should be  separated.  It is important that these  numbers be finalized in the next  month with help from council 
members.)  
3.  Planning Contractor noted that the per cap ita water use rates may decrease in the future due to water conservation measures  enacted by the recent Task Force bill.  It 

was noted that a time-dependent adjustment to the per capita rate was developed to take into account th e natural water savings  resulted from new construction that will 
only have low-flow fixtures and replacement of  older toilets with low-flow toilets in older homes throughout the planning period.   The Planning Contractor can provide 
this data if the council is interested.  
4.  Council member asked if an industrial user  does not have a permit but uses large quantities of water (>80,000 gpd), should it  be left as municipal or reported as 

industrial.   (If the information on the industry is  available, or if  it is one of the designated North American Industry Classifi cation System industries, it should be 
provided to the Plannin g Contractor.  It would be incl uded in the industrial water demand forecast.)   
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

6 
Planning Contractor stated that 75 gpcd is used  as the self-supplied wa ter use rate for people on individual wells.  Other numbers may be used  for the different count ies if requested.  The 
majority of water served in the Savanna h-Upper Ogeechee Region is from public water suppliers and from surface water sources.  Pr ojections of future water use are based on 
current practice as a baseline assumption.  In ot her words, the current ratio of surface water to groundwater use is held constant in the futu re in the baseline forecasts.  Council members 
may request changes to this assumption through  feedback if they know  of development of new water supply sources that may change the ratio. 
  1.  Council member asked if Chatham County will  be added to the water use projection 

models.  (Yes.  The resource assessment models are based on basins and aquifers, not on regional boundaries.) 
 2.  Is it possible to project changes in the se lf-supplied to publicly-supplied ratio due to 
the creation of new public water suppliers.   (Yes, please inform the Planning Contractor of plans or c hanges to new public water supp lies so we can incorporate 
them into the forecasts.)  
Municipal Wastewater Forecasts  
Municipal wastewater projections are ba sed on indoor water use.  Estimates of inflow/infiltration are added to the indoor wate r uses to produce projections for municipal 
wastewater quantities.  This does not include industrial wastewater.  
The average indoor water use estimates are ba sed on an EPD report (G eorgia Water Use and Conservation Profiles, 2008) th at includes a water use profile  for eight communities in 
Georgia. The eight communities had good billing data and accounting systems that facilitated the analysis of use by category.  The communities in the Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Region 
were compared to the eight communities in this  report to find a "similar" water use pattern.  The comparison looked at population, age of housing, and land use. 
  The indoor water use percentage ranged from 77% to 88% for counties in the SavannahUpper Ogeechee Region.  The baseline assumption is that for future wastewater projections, the indoor use ratios will be held constant  for each county.  If the indoor use ratios are 
expected to change due to changes in densit y, land use or other reasons, then the assumption that the indoor usage fractions  are to be held constant th rough the planning window should 
be adjusted.  Council members need to let the Planning Contractor know if they expect the indoor use ratios to change in the future. 
  Additionally, the percentage of  people using septic systems is  held constant from 2010-2050 

as a baseline assumption.  The base year (200 5) septic system percentage was estimated based on the number of septic systems reporte d in 1990 census data and the number of new 
septic installations between 2000 and 2007.  In  2000, the census stopped collecting data on the number of septic systems.  EPD collected  information on the number of septic systems 
installed between 2000 and 2007 by county for use in  forecasts.  Therefore, the percent of  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

7 
septic systems in 2005 (base year) is an interpretation of these two sets of data.  Council members are urged to provide better local data,  as available.  Many local health departments 
track numbers of septic systems, but not all.   The percentage of the population on centralized wastewater treatment system for each county was presented. 
  1.  Council member observed that table shown in the presentation does not match what is 

in the handout.   (It is possibly a mistake.  The data in the handout is correct.)  [Note from Planning Contractor: The data shown in the presentation was  the percentage of people 
who have public water supply but uses septic system to dispose of the wastewater .  The handout showed the percentage of total WW that is treated in septic system.] 
 2.  Council member expressed concern about the  assumption that the ba seline septic use 
ratios are being held consta nt for the planning period .  (If there are plans to expand existing wastewater collec tion and treatment systems  in the future, Planning 
Contractor would like to work  with each County to refin e this percentage so the forecast can be adjusted.   If better data  on septic systems is available from local 
health department, council members should send it to Planning Contractor.)  
3.  Council member asked if Madison County is shown to have 100% septic usage, then the wastewater projections assume that th ere is never going to  be a centralized 

wastewater system.   (Correct.  Planning Contractor  knows this assumption may not be right, but need to work with the Council to define the "future" percentage that will 
be served on centralized wastewater syst ems. Planning Contractor asked the Council and local utilities to provide  information on new or planned  systems so we can factor 
this in future projections.)  
Industrial Water  
EPD's permit database was the starting point for industrial demand projections.  There are 13 categories of major water-using industries included.  Projections of employment growth from 
OPB are used to project future demands for  each industry.  If specific input was received from industries, that additional information was incorporated.   
  1.  Council questioned that if a ma jor textile mill is closed dow n, that demand is kept in 

the database because someone else may use it?   (Yes, it was agreed early on in the forecasting process by all councils that  even if an industry is  showing declining 
employment, the water use for the particular  industry will be he ld constant through the planning period.)   
 2.  Council asked at what point in time were the industr y water use rates fixed.   (The 
base year is 2005 and data from EPD was used to gather industrial water use.  Certain industries may decline by 2050, but  their demand is projected to remain and 
be filled by other industries.)   

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

8 
3.  Council commented that this methodology seems to be flawed.  In addition to textiles, the paper industry is also going to decrease , and a great deal of water is likely to 

become available.  (This is a way to reserve available water for future growth.  It may help to look at the industrial water uses  for the Region as a  whole instead of by 
industry.)  
4.  Planning Contractor stated that industria l uses are significan t.  The Council can ultimately decide how to handle available capacity for declining industries. 
 Industrial Wastewater 
 Industrial wastewater quantitie s were estimated based on usage, using data from the EPD 
withdrawal permit database.  Wa stewater permits were also  used to determine where the treated effluent goes (stream discharge or  land-application).  EP D provided a ratio of 
estimated wastewater return by industry for use  in wastewater forecasting.  This return ratio was based on researched industry average return rates. 

 1.  Council noted that inactive permits are bei ng used as an asset  by communities to try 

to recruit industries  to move in.  It would be bene ficial to include this as a consideration. 
 2.  Council asked when the baseline would be updated.   (Immediately.  Planning 

Contractor will continue revising the fo recasts based on feedback and hopes to be done with this in the near future.) 
 (4) Guest Presentation from the Metro North Georgia Water Planning District 

Matt Harper gave a brief overview of the natu re of his presentation, which is designed to share the Metro North Georgia Water Planning Di strict's issues and lessons learned with the 
Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council.   He covered the creation and structure of the District, which consists of 16 coun ties and is governed by 26 board members (16 
elected officials, 10 citizens).   The timeline set in 2001 at its cr eation was rather aggressive.  District plans were adopted in 2003 and updated in 2009. 
 EPD provides planning guidance but does not n ecessarily agree with everything in the 
District's plans.  EPD certifie s the plans so long as they follow the guidance EPD sets forth for the District.
 The metro North GA area has crystalline rock  aquifers which produce little groundwater, so 
reliance for water supply is primarily on surface wa ter streams.  Reservoirs are difficult to build in the District's region.   Water transfers into the Distri ct from outside are prohibited, 
but transfers within the District  are necessary because many of  the cities are built on ridges.  Water conservation is essential to meeting future needs.  With water conservation, the current 
supply of water may be extended out further befo re alternate measures are needed to meet demand.  With conservation, the District is not projected to have a water shortage by 2035. 
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

9 
1.  Council asked if the projections assume the  District will continue to get the same amount of water from Lake Lanier.  (Yes.) 

 2.  Council asked how much groundwater is used in the district.  (Very little.  Most of the 
new permits are expected to be for surface water.)  
3.  Council questioned where the potentia l new reservoir sites are.   (There are several sites, but not all are feasible.  Such sites are hard to come by.) 

 4.  Council asked by whom the new reservoirs would be funded.   (Local governments 
and rate payers.)  
5.  Council asked which base year data was used for projections for the recent plan updates.   (2006 data was used in the most recent plans, normalized for standard 

weather conditions by a national expert.   The District feels these are good projections.) 
 6.  Council asked how the District considers economic growth into its future needs for 
water, considering a potentially worse future drought.   (There is long-term planning and there is drought planning, and the two are d ifferent in nature.  Reservoirs must 
begin construction 5 years in advance in  order to meet some projected demand.  Drought was considered, but had the Distri ct assumed that a drought would happen 
every 5 years, it would underestimate realistic projected water usages.)  
7.  Council asked what is the District's last alternative.  (Reallocate Lake Lanier.)  
Mr. Harper discussed the cons ervation measures put in plac e by the Metro North Georgia Water Planning District through  its water plans.  Ten conser vation measures were adopted, 
including conservation pricing,  replacement of old plumbing fixtures, pre-rinse spray valve education, rain sensor shut-off switches on new  irrigation systems, sub-meters in new multifamily buildings, water system leak reduction a nd repair, residential water audits, low-flow residential retrofit kits, commercial water audits, and public awareness/education. 
  1.  Council asked how the proper multi-tiered rate structure was determined.   (It's an art 

and must be considered separately for different regions and different utilities.)  
2.  Council asked if tiered pricing is po tentially a state-wide measure.   (Yes.  It's in the new bill from the Governor's bill SB370). 

 3.  Council member asked what Atlanta is  doing to fix water system leaks.   (There are 
legitimate water uses that aren't metered  or billed, such as City Halls or fire hydrants, which can confuse estimates of wate r loss.  The difficulty is in finding out 
which is which.  The City is using special software to perform audits on water systems and to locate, prioritize and optimize water leak repairs.) 
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

10 
4.  Council member commented that not mete ring government buildings sounds like an excuse to not fix leaks.  Usually, the only unaccounted-for water  that is not a leak 

comes from fire hydrants.   (Loss of water is potentially  due to long runs of pipe or very old systems.  Atlanta has both.  Ther e are many leaks but  they are being fixed. 
9,000 repairs were made in 2009.)  
5.  Council asked if there is a certa in leaking percentage that th e District is aiming for.  (The estimates of loss vary from place to  place.  City of Atlanta has leaks and is 

working to fix them.    Planning Contractor noted that ea ch utility with a withdrawal permit will soon be required to submit an annual water conservation progress report 
and non-revenue water or water loss will be tracked in this progress report.)  
6.  Council member commented that McDuffi e County caught 12% of its unaccounted-for water by replacing all the building meters. ( Meter replacement and calibration 

program is important in controlling water loss.)  
7.  Council inquired about how local government s account for required retrofits with budget problems.   (It's going to hurt local budgets, but it is something that needs to 

be done.  It is important to show that  rate-payers and small governments are willing to enact conservation measures if larger governments are expected to do it too.) 
 8.  Council member commented that he has heard from time to time that as a nation, the 
United States is behind in water conservati on.  Other nations appear to be far more advanced.  He asked if Atlanta has done  any benchmarking with other countries to 
improve technology and alternatives.   (No.  There is, however, nothing else like this plan in the Country.  The leadership on the  front end from the District says these 
measures are needed, but then the EPD has the ability to enforce.)  
Matt commented that the water demand from th e 2008 plan was significantly lower than the demand from the 2003 plan, which is indicative of smarter water use and better planning. 
 New Water Facilities 
 Current plans in the District call for six new  reservoirs, six new water treatment plants, and 
the expansion of 28 existing water treatment plants.   

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

11 
Local Planning  
Matt spoke on the need to develop and update wa ter master plans, local drought contingency water plans, and source water supply watershed protection plans. 
  1.  Council member asked what is m eant by "watershed  protection".   (It means 

managing growth and development within a watershed to protect its water.  For example, it isn't wise to put a new inta ke downstream of a railroad crossing or to 
allow a new dry cleaner to pollute the runoff.  Watershed protection is essentially risk management.) 
 2.  Council then asked how the water in a wate rshed can be protec ted if the governing 

entity doesn't own or control the land.  (When reservoirs are identified as being for water supply, the same buffers still apply.   Many governments can set aside funds to 
buy land around a reservoir to maintain  the buffers, but they  cannot buy a whole watershed, so they must educate the public.  Cooperation is essential.) 
 Public Education 
 Matt commented that the best way to affect people is face-to-face.  There is a regional 
component on public education and local im plementation of regional goals.  Videos, brochures, press releases, and a website are used in the District's education efforts. 
 Toilet Rebate Program 
 A rebate program for new, efficient toilets was started in 2008 with 16 utilities participating.  
Under this effort, single-family residential homeowners may get rebates for new low-flow toilets.  To date, about 36,000 toilets have been replaced. 
 Wastewater Treatment Issues 
 Wastewater treatment systems in the District  must be improved and expanded.  The growth 
of the population served by septic systems is  an important factor in future wastewater generation.  Septic currently accounts for 10% of  all wastewater in the District and 20% of 
residential wastewater.  Matt noted that Walt on County opted out of the District in 2008 to join the Upper Oconee Water Planning Council. 
 Septage forecasts are included in the plan updat e.  Wastewater septage loads on treatment 
plants are expected to decrea se because the percentages of  homes on septic tanks in the District are expected to decrease. 
 Intensive management of sewers and septic syst ems is important.  In pa rticular, an ordinance 
for private wastewater systems  may be enforced by EPD, so adopting one may be helpful for planning entities.  They may prohibit private  systems altogether or  require that they be 
installed according to certain specifications.  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

12 
 Greater emphasis is being placed on local wastewater master plans.  Local wastewater system 
providers are responsible for certain things co ncerning their centrali zed systems, but local governments are responsible for local septic systems. 
 Watershed Management 
 Paved areas impact streams, generating water  quality problems in the District.  Land cover 
has changed dramatically in recent years and this must be acknowledged and accounted for in watershed management.  Important tools for  watershed management are comprehensive land 
use planning, floodplain delineat ion and maintenance, san itary sewer in spection and management, ordinances on construction imp acts, asset management, pollution prevention 
including detection of illicit  discharges into storm sewers,  water quality monitoring, local education, and resource-specific measures such as TMDLs or endangered species protection. 
 State Water Plan 
 The State Water Plan cannot chan ge state law, which is why  the District's boundaries were 
fixed when it was included as a regional council.  
Lessons Learned  
Local participation and financia l support are keys to a successf ul water planning program.  Partnership between local and state governments is important. 
 Don't re-invent the wheel - the District relies  heavily on knowledge and existing efforts and 
plans.  

1.  Planning Contractor asked for advice for this group for future water planning challenges.  (Know about legal challenges and droughts in advance.) 
 2.  Council inquired if the Distri ct expects the United States  Congress to reallocate Lake 

Lanier.   (Reallocation is the only option that ca n be prepared by 2012.  Everything else will take more time.  It must be re membered that there will be other hurdles, as 
the Magnuson ruling was just the first phase  of the problem.  Endangered species is another consideration which hasn't yet be en answered, and it may overrule a 
successful negotiation between GA, AL and FL.)  
3.  Concerning the Water Wars, Council asked what  it is that Atlanta  has to give up in terms of growth potential to meet the n eeds of the other states enough to reach a 

consensus.  Essentially, how far off  are the states from agreement?   (Georgia is willing to give up quite a bit and would feel  it.  There is hope with the Alabama 
negotiations.  Unfortunately, no one is truly privy to what those negotiations are.)   

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

13 
4.  Council questioned if Southern Company ha s a power plant taki ng a great deal of water.  (Total power generation within the Distri ct was considered and it added up to 

18 MGD.  Somewhere around 90% of that is returned.)  
(5) Agricultural and Energy Forecast Update 

Bill gave a brief update on proj ections for agricultural and energy water uses.  About 47.5 MGD is used in crop irrigation for the Region, with 9.2 MGD for livestock and 10.2 MGD 

for horticulture.  The 2050 forecasted irrigation needs for major crops have been completed.  Based on comments from multiple councils, EP D is working with the livestock and green 
industries to complete their water demands.   Cumulatively, these industries use significant water, but the individual users are not large  enough to require individual permits.  UGA and 
EPD are working with representatives of these  industries to develop a snapshot of current water use.   
 The demands for livestock water use are a snapshot of the 2005 usage.  Future livestock 
water use will not be available for this round  of planning.  EPD hopes to collect better information by the next round of planning for liv estock water use.  A snapshot of the 2005 
usage has also been estimated for the nursery  and horticulture industries.  The green industry is working on forecasts through 2050 and they are not available yet.   
  The energy demand forecasts are still being wo rked on by EPD with inputs from Georgia's 

power companies.  The hang-up is the question of  what the future fuel sources will be.  The forecasts are projected to be done in the summer of 2010. 
 (6) Next Steps 

It is critical for the Planning Contractor to receive and incorporate any additional feedback on municipal and industrial water and wastewater  forecasts.  The agricultural demand forecasts 
should also be finalized soon.  

(7) Joint Meeting Update/Overview of Resource Assessments 

EPD held joint meetings in January and February of 2010 to present initial results of resource assessments for Georgia's six major basins.  The resource assessments  were performed for 

surface water availability, groundwater availa bility and surface water quality under current use conditions. 
 Surface Water Availability 

 Current surface water availability for consumptive water use and for flow regime (in-stream 
use) was evaluated.  The resource assessment models included 70 basic nodes and 40 planning nodes.  River-Basin Planning Tools a nd Reservoir Operations Models were used.  
Bill noted that the models assume that the stat e will not force a utility to augment river flows to meet the 7Q10 if the river flow is below that amount.  Bill gave an overview of the  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

14 
assessment process and showed how the unimpaire d flow and flow regime is defined step-by-step. 
  Five planning nodes (sub-basin pl anning units) were selected in  the Savannah River basin.  

Bill first discussed the Hartwell  Node as an example.  The current resource assessment showed no water supply gap at Lake Hartwell  based on drawdown to a minimum lake level 
of 37% conservation pool.  There were no constr aints in the model for  how low the lake can be drawn down.  Bill then reviewed the Lake  Thurmond node results.  There was no water 
supply gap found there, but it  required drawing down to 13% of  the conservation storage.  The results were similar at the Augusta, Clyo  and Savannah Nodes.  In summary, the water 
demand and flow regime can be fully met by ava ilable water, and there is ample storage in the Corps reservoirs for a typi cal drought scenario.  One of  the tasks for EPD in the coming 
months will be to impose future demands on the model.  

1.  Chairman Cross commented that he disagree s with that method.  In this scenario, water quality impacts downstream may affect the operation of upstream reservoirs.   
 2.  Council member noted that the Council also  doesn't know when South Carolina will 

put a pipe in the Savannah River and try to take the water.  
3.  Chairman Cross stated that so far, he had not heard anything from South Carolina that would indicate a major withdrawal impact. 
 4.  Jeff Larson said that EPD is currently working with South Carolina to get to an 

agreement.  EPD has been talking with S outh Carolina's Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) and its  Department of Natural Resources about 
using a similar process to project demands.  The starting point of the agreement will be future demands. 
 5.  Council asked if EPD is looking at scen arios with Lakes Keowee and Jocassee 

alleviating downstream water use.   (Jeff commented that they are considering such scenarios.)     
 6.  Council asked what criterion is used  to set the 3,500 cfs minimum from the 

Thurmond Reservoir.  (Downstream flow needs and water quality.)  
Surface Water Quality Resource Assessment  
Bill described the basic methodology of the  water quality (or assimilative capacity) modeling.  Input parameters include: stream fl ow, topography, rainfall, evaporation, and land 
use.  The models are run at cr itical conditions with lake m odels (watershed models) looking at the impacts of nutrients.  The models were ca librated to real-world  data using stream flow 
records to produce dissolved oxygen levels at cri tical conditions.  He  also discussed existing water quality standards for dissolved oxygen. 
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

15 
The results of stream segment models were de fined in 5 levels and the streams were mapped according to category.  Waters ne ar the coast are naturally low in dissolved oxygen.  A new 
TMDL is being developed for the Savannah River and Harbor concerning dissolved oxygen.  
An additional issue is how the  TMDL load will be shared with South Carolina.  Jeff Larson commented that the major dischargers are alre ady discussing this a nd will hopefully produce 
a TMDL implementation plan.  
Bill discussed sample results from the modeling effort for the Savannah River and for the Savannah Harbor.  Nitrogen and phosphorus levels are both concerns for the SavannahUpper Ogeechee Region.  

1.  Council asked why fecal coliform is not considered.   (Dissolved oxygen is the major concern, and fecal coliform is not a critical  factor for determining dissolved oxygen.  

Additionally, fecal  coliform is rather difficult to  model.  Planning Contractor noted that fecal coliform has been addressed by  the 303(d) List of Waters and TMDL 
requirements. EPD has to pr ioritize the study paramete rs due to limited funding and time.) 
 The draft synopses of the resour ce assessments have been posted to the State Water Plan 
website for council's review.  
Groundwater Availability 
 From a groundwater perspective, Georgia is divi ded into two characteristic regions by a fault 

line.  Sustainable yield is  the amount that can be draw n from groundwater without causing undesirable results.  In the crystalline-rock  aquifer, sufficient cracks are not likely to be 
found to bring sustainable yield up to meet  demand.  In the Upper Floridian, Cretaceous, Claiborne, and Paleozoic-rock aquifers the sustainable yield is higher than current usage. 
 The model increased withdrawals from existing wells up to the design metric to determine 
what would be an acceptable yield.  Bill covered some sample results of groundwater modeling and described the layout  of aquifers in Georgia.  Th e resource assessment shows 
that there are relatively large quantities of  groundwater available above existing withdrawals in all modeled aquifers in Georgia, except fo r the Paleozoic rock aquifer in northwestern 
Georgia.  The draft synopses of the resource assessments have been posted to the State Water Plan website for councils' revi ew at the location linked below.   A summary of the predicted 
sustainable yield for each major aquifer is provided.  
http://www.georgiawaterplanning.org/news/DraftWaterResourceAssessmentsforReviewandComment.php 
  1.  Council asked if there is concer n about saltwater intrusion.   (Yes, it is a major 

concern in the coastal area.)   

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

16 
(8) Management Practices 

Bill gave an overview on management practice se lection and goals, as well as examples on water supply, return an d quality management practices.   Water supply management practice 

examples include water conservation, new reserv oirs, and water return management.  Return management includes reducing outdoor use, decr easing land application of wastewater, and 
reducing septic usage to increase the quantity of treated wastewater returning to the river.  
Management Practice Selection Process and Example 
 Bill focused on the Hartwell node as an example.   Most of the demand at that location is 

municipal.  Basic practices such as water  conservation measures, system management, and water loss reductions (no-regrets measures) can  possibly results in a ba seline reduction in 
total demand.  The current demands today are  approximately at 10 MGD, and approximately 21 MGD has been permitted.  Future projections are below the 21 MGD of permitted 
withdrawals.    

1.  One Council member asked if the model uses  data from South Ca rolina, and if not, shouldn't the Council be concerned with  them in this comparison process?   (South 

Carolina will certainly need to be included  in future assessments, but this analysis compares permitted capacity to actual usage and forecast in the Region.) 
 2.  Council asked if there were a time utilities  were encouraged to  use land application 
systems and whether that trend is changing.  (It was a preference from the past, which is changing.)   
 Bill showed an example of water quality ma nagement practice selection from the Upper 
Oconee basin where the impacts of  point and non-point sources ca n be evaluated separately.  Water quality management practices may in clude reuse, land application, improving 
compliance, best management practices, and watershed-based permitting.  Management practices should consider regi onal vision and goals (such as  minimum lake levels for the 
Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Region).  Screening criteria must be developed which will be used to score management practices.  The  process by which management practices are 
selected consists of voting and documentation of  the basis of the decision.  That process can quickly get complicated. 
  1.  Council suggested that a smaller council may n eed to be maintained down the road to 

address changes to management practices  recommended by the state and EPD.   (Jeff Larson responded that guidance on how to remain involved will be produced by EPD, 
and that the council process will continue in the long-term.)  
Bill asked if the council preferred to discuss ma nagement practices as a group or to create a subcommittee, or to request JJG recommendations. 
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

17 
1.  Council member noted that the EPD results were for existing demands.  He asked what consideration there will be of future demands.   (Chairman Cross responded that 

the current results should al low the council to make decisi ons on what lake level to request.  The Clemson study will also be helpfu l.  Bill noted that  a draft plan needs to 
be completed by the Council by December 2010.)  
Chairman Cross commented on the importance of having a set of forecasts adopted so the Council can move forward in this planning pro cess.  He identified a Council member as a 
point contact for each county and asked the sele cted Council member to  contact stakeholders and local utilities in that county to have them  review the forecasts and either approve the 
forecasts or provide information for further  revision.  Chairman Cross suggested to set a timetable of 30 days for reviewing and revi sion and recommended meeting again between 30 
and 45 days to adopt the revised forecasts.   He asked for volunteer to host the interim meeting.  Lee Webster offered to host the in terim meeting in Burke County.  The Planning 
Contractor urged the Council me mbers to obtain data from al l players in the entire county, otherwise it is difficult to decide the count y-wide assumptions or forecasts.  Planning 
Contractor suggested development of a summ ary sheet for each county.  Chairman Cross encouraged the Planning Contract or to be proactive in calling to  get feedback.  The contacts 
for each county are listed below:  

Banks - Jerry Boling Burke - Lee Webster 
Columbia - Ron Cross Elbert - Eddie Madden 
Franklin - Donald Dye Glascock - Charlie Newton 
Hart - Pat Goran Jefferson - Thomas Jordan 
Jenkins - Robert Jenkins Lincoln - Patricia Goodwin 
Madison - Bruce Azevedo McDuffie - Charlie Newton 
Oglethorpe - Bruce Azevedo Rabun - Larry Walker 
Richmond - Tom Wiedmeier Screven - Stan Sheppard 
Stephens - Donald Dye Taliaferro - N/A 
Warren - Chris McCorkle Wilkes - Mike Eskew 
 Chairman Cross reiterated that lake level mini mums to protect future growth are a key issue 
for the council to decide on.  Bill Martello sugg ested that a statistical limit be considered (an example goal may be to maintain elevations above 320 ft MSL 90% of the time).   
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

18 
Charlie Newton asked if the counc il can have an effect on th e minimum flow downstream of the reservoirs through monitoring of the downstream water quality.   (Keith Crowe noted that 
while that is possible, monitoring can produce  changes in the other dire ction as well if the water quality were poorer than expected.) 
 Ron proposed to select 3 people from the coun cil who will meet with the Savannah River 
Committee to produce more dialogue.  

1.  Brian Baker asked how the council will proceed  with the draft of th e report sections.  (Chairman Cross suggested em ailing it out to council  members who will have the 

opportunity to comment on it.  Potentially a  subcommittee could be formed to work in greater detail on the report later on in the process.) 
 2.  Brian Baker noted that in 30 days a check  would be done on the forecasts and asked 
how the council will proceed.   (Chairman Cross suggested t hat the council vote on accepting the forecasts, then the rest of the interim meeting may be used to discuss 
the report sections or to take a tour of Plant Vogtle.)  
3.  Planning Contractor noted that energy forecas ts may not be ready for the meeting in 30 days.   (Tim McGill responded that the energy projections are being worked on 

diligently.)   

(9) Elected Official and Public Comments  

Chairman Cross opened the floor to comments from the public.  
A comment was received that the Savannah Rive r was mentioned in a study as one of the nation's worst toxic release receptors in th e country for combined air, land and water 
pollutants.  That may have an impact on the planning process.  
(10)  Wrap-Up/ Council Meeting 5 Evaluation/ Next Meeting  

Meeting was adjourned at 2:30 PM.  
(11)  Summary of Action Items  

1.  Planning contractor to collect info rmation on the ongoing study by the Strom Thurmond Institute at Clemson University.  

 2.  Planning contractor to se nd the appointed Council me mbers a follow-up forecast 
summary sheet. Council will use the summary  sheet to dialog  with individual counties on future water use.  
  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

19 
3.  Planning contractor to set up an interim meeting in Burke County to summarize and finalize the municipal and industrial water  and wastewater forecast numbers.  Plant 

Vogtle tour will be scheduled.  
4.  Planning contractor to follow up with Arcad is team on "regulated stream" future condition and management practice model runs. 

 5.  Planning contractor to perform research  on interbasin transfer language and 
requirement in State Water Plan and send the information to council members.  
6.  Council will select 2-3 persons to repr esent Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Region to attend Savannah River Committee with South Carolina 
 Meeting Attendees 

 Council Members in Attendance 

Ron Cross, Chair        Charlie Newton, Vice-Chair 
Bruce Azevedo    Braye  Boardman 
Jerry Boling          Deke Copenhaver                       
Don Dye     Patricia  Goodwin (alternate) 
Larry Guest      Robert  Jenkins     
Thomas Jordan     Scott  MacGregor  
Eddie Madden     Chris  McCorkle 
Tim McGill            James Newsome  
Larry Walker      R.  Lee Webster       
       Council Members Not in Attendance 

Charles Cawthon     Barry  Cronic 
Mike Eskew      Dan  Fowler 
Pat Goran      Toye  Hill (alternate)   
Lewis Sanders      Stan  Sheppard 
Tom Wiedmeier    Tenia  Workman  
Tom McCall (Ex-Officio)      Ralph Hudgens (Ex-Officio)   
 Staff in Attendance 

Jeff Larson - EPD        Brian Baker - EPD  

Draft Meeting Summary Savannah Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Council Meeting #5 

March 25, 2010

20 
Bill Martello - JJG          Tai-Yi Su - JJG 
Casey Porter - JJG          
 
Partnering Agencies and General Public  
George Bramlett - Corps of Engineers - Lake Hartwell 
Scott Calloway - Georgia DNR, EPD in Athens 
Dennis Black - Georgia Farm Bureau 
Leanne Morrow - Georgia DNR, EPD in Athens 
Vickie Yarbrough - Georgia DNR, EPD in Athens 
Robert Amos - Georgia Soil & Water Commission 
Keith Crowe - Corps of Engineers 
Ed Bettross - Georgia DNR, Water Resources Division 
Deatre Denion - Department of Community Affairs 
John Colberg - Georgia Forestry Commission 
Matt Harper - Metro North Georgia Water Planning District 
Nancy Bobbitt - US Senator Isakson 
Eston Melton - Member of the Public 
Sam Booker - Georgia Soil & Water Commission 
Frank Carl - Savannah River Keeper 
Allen Saxon - August-Richmond County Utilities 
Lindsay Averett - Member of the Public 
Mark Gaffney - WSGC Radio, Elberton 
   casey.porter 49 9 9 23 3 110 5 112 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - Meeting_Summary_Savannah Upper Ogeechee CM5_042010_Draft.doc SUO_CM5_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2 