

B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.3  

February 12, 2011  
  
 To:    Upper Flint Water Planning Council 
 From:    Kristin Rowles, GWPPC and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch 
 cc:     Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD 
 Subject:   Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 9 on February 7, 2011 
  
The council meeting was held on February 7, 2011, at the Weyerhauser Flint River Mill in Oglethorpe. The list of attendees is attached.  In addition to these minutes, the 
presentations (slides) discussed in this meeting will be posted on the Upper Flint Council's web portal (http://www.upperflint.org/). 
 Welcome and Introductions

  

Chairman Chase opened the meeting and welcomed attendees.  Council member Randall Starling welcomed the Council to the Weyerhauser facility and provided the invocation.  
Randall then introduced Weyerhause staff and reviewed Weyerhauser safety policies. Chairman Donald Chase stated that a quorum was not currently present, but was expected 
later during the meeting. Chairman Chase then reviewed the following upcoming Council schedule: 
  March/April 2011    Council Meeting 10 

May 2, 2011       Recommended Plan to Georgia EPD May-July 2011     Public Notice of Draft Plan 
August 2011       Final Production of Adopted WDCP September 20, 2011   Georgia EPD Approves Upper Flint Regional Water 

Development and Conservation Plan  
The council approved the meeting summary from the last council meeting and the agenda for today's meeting by consensus. 
 Chairman Chase said he believed the Council was moving in the right direction and 
thanked everyone for stepping up when needed to help the council develop its plan.  He also thanked those who attended the ACF Councils Joint Meeting on January 27, 2011. 
Council Vice-chair Dick Morrow said he was impressed that quite a number of folks from the council were at the joint meeting. Council member Cliff Arnett said that some of 
the council's concerns related to the Middle Chattahoochee plan have been addressed. He  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 noted that Dr. Aris Georgakakos' (GA Tech) model results showed that alternative 

reservoir management schemes could lead to a more balanced outcome. A follow-up meeting with representatives of the three councils and Dr. Georgakakos would be helpful. 
 Kristin Rowles noted that the council now had a quorum. The Council then conducted an 
election for chair and vice-chair. There were nominations with seconds for both Donald Chase and Dick Morrow to continue in their current positions as chair and vice-chair, 
respectively.  Donald Chase indicated that he would accept this continued responsibility if elected, and Dick Morrow indicated his assent as well.  Donald Chase and Dick 
Morrow were elected chair and vice-chair, respectively, for calendar year 2011 by unanimous vote via written ballots. 
 Council member Brant Keller asked what happens to the Council after the plan is 
accepted by EPD.  Tim Cash noted that there are on-going discussions within EPD about the future of the Councils.  Dick Morrow said that the water planning effort needs to 
continue. Council member Raines Jordan said the legislature needs to commit to the process and maybe we need to make a statement as a Council. Council member Cliff 
Arnett said such a letter is an excellent idea, and both GMA and ACCG need to be contacted so that they know the council's position.  Cliff Arnett volunteered to contact 
ACCG and Dick Morrow volunteered to contact GMA. Chairman Chase said he would draft a letter on behalf of the Council that would state that this Council feels that 
continuing the regional planning process is of critical importance. Council member Frank Keller commented that other councils might want to send similar letters. Carbon 
copies of the council's letter can be sent to the other councils, the Metro District, GMA, and ACCG. 
 Overview of Plan Revisions  
 Kristin Rowles noted the current draft of the plan is dated January 21, 2011. She said it 
includes sections 1-6 and part of section 7.  She said that this draft of the plan addressed comments from EPD on the October 15, 2010 draft and decisions made by the council 
about the plan at the last council meeting (November). Kristin said that this meeting is the second to the last council meeting before the plan is submitted to EPD on May 2, 2011.   
 Council member Cliff Arnett asked how the appendices would be included in the final 
plan.  Kristin said the appendices will be provided as supplemental materials on the council's web site. She said references with internet links to supplemental materials have 
replaced references to appendices. Arnett asked how long the materials would be available through the web site. Tim Cash said he thought they would always be a part of 
the permanent public file, but did not know how long the materials would be kept on the web site itself. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 Council member Brant Keller expressed concern that printing the materials for the water 

quality modeling results was difficult.  
Section 1 Kristin said new text was provided for Sections 1.1 and 1.2 by EPD.  She also noted that 
there was a modification of goal #4 (page 1-3) based on the council decision about this goal at November council meeting. 
 Section 2 
Kristin said there were only minor text edits to this section.  She said that a new map of the planning region is currently being produced for Section 2.   
 Section 3 
Kristin said that information about water resources shared with neighboring councils has been added.  There were also clarifications in the model discussion and changes to the 
chart formatting. She noted that the Council will discuss Section 3.2.1 in the Water Quantity report today 
 Section 4 
Kristin said that new material was added to Section 4.4 Thermoelectric Power Production Water Demand Forecasts, and this section would be further discussed today.  There were 
also changes to some of the charts.  
Council member Cliff Arnett said he was concerned about the presentation of the model nodes. He thought that the study nodes as well as the planning nodes should be explained 
or indicated on the map. Kristin said that these nodes could be added to the new map in section 2, and the footnote on page 3-3 would be modified to reflect this change. 
 Section 5 
Kristin noted that there were minor text and references edits. There were also new water quality maps. 
 Section 6 
Kristin noted that Section 6.1 was edited for clarity and length. The discussion of uncertainties was modified to add additional information on how those issues are 
currently being addressed and where to get more information.   
She said one of the uncertainties will be discussed in Water Quantity Committee report. In Section 6.2, the following changes were made in Table 6-1: 

\Gamma   New categories 
\Gamma   Numbering of management practices 
\Gamma   Prioritization of management practices  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 

\Gamma   Changes to Management Practices based on council decisions and EPD comments: DM2, DM5, DM6, SF4, SF5, RM1, WQ2 

 Following Table 6-1, Kristin said there were modifications in Section 6-2 to further 
explain the storage modeling run and the Council's selection of management practices vis-a`-vis identified gaps and the Council's vision and goals. 
 Section 7 
Kristin said there were changes to Section 7.4: Recommendations to the State. It is now categorized into information needs and water policy recommendations.  She said that 
several of the items listed were new to this draft; she had culled them from meeting summaries to try to ensure that all recommendations were included. This section will also 
be reviewed later today. Kristin would like the council's feedback on whether this section is complete. 
 Kristin also noted that the remaining parts of Section 7 and the whole of Section 8 would 
be revised after this meeting.   
Water Quantity Committee Report and Recommendations  
Committee chair Cliff Arnett thanked committee members for attending the committee meeting on January 26, 2011. He said it has been an honor to work with such an 
outstanding group of people. A meeting summary of the last committee meeting is included as pages 24-28 of pre-meeting packet. During the committee meeting, members 
reviewed changes in the January 21st draft, discussed further plan revisions, and developed recommendations to Council for today's meeting. 
 He said the first recommendation was for the following new statement of the council's 
position on the model assumptions regarding withdrawals for reservoir filling in the upper part of the basin (see Section 3.2.1, page 3-4, paragraph 4): 
  The Council's position is that the modeling assumptions regarding withdrawals to 

fill upstream reservoirs do not reflect actual conditions, and as a result, the current assumptions result in an overestimation of flow shortfalls in the Flint 
River Basin.  The Council recommends that future modeling to assess surface water flows in the Flint be preceded by an evaluation of actual withdrawals to fill 
reservoirs in the Upper Flint in order to support the development of improved assumptions about such withdrawals and more accurate modeling of surface 
water flows.   
After some discussion the Council accepted by consensus this recommended language for insertion into the plan.  
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 The next recommendation concerned the 2nd bullet point on page 6-3 in Section 6.1. This 

item concerns the 2008 Biological Opinion on Woodruff Dam flow targets. The committee recommends the following changes: 

T,   Change the 2nd sentence to read as follows: "The consultation will continue ongoing depth distribution data collection and analysis to determine the minimum 

flows needed in order to protect listed species."   T,   Add a footnote referring to the statement of the Council's position on this issue on 
page 7-12. Council Vice-Chair Dick Morrow commented that these changes were suggested because 
of the committee's concern that the previous language seemed to indicate that an increase of the target was needed. The Council accepted the committee's recommendation by 
consensus.   
The next recommendation concerned Section 6.2 (page 6-10). The committee suggested adding the following statement: 
   Water conservation is a top priority management practice in this plan. 

The Upper Flint Water Council recognizes that water users have already invested in and implemented a substantial portfolio of conservation 
practices in the region. Their prior conservation efforts should be recognized and taken into account in the design of conservation programs 
and policies.  
Council member Randall Starling said the committee wanted to credit users that have already implemented water conservation practices.  Council member Brant Keller said 
this is a good point and that the City of Griffin has lost revenue through water conservation. Council member Lamar Perlis asked whether we should note particular 
industries. Starling said the committee had discussed this, but did do not want to single out a particular industry. Brant noted that a similar statement is needed for the Water 
Quality section.  Kristin said that we could come back to that in the Water Quality committee's discussion. 
 The last sentence was modified as followed: 
  Their prior conservation efforts should be taken into account and 

given credit toward compliance in the design of conservation programs and policies. 
 The Council accepted the committee's recommendation, as modified, by consensus. 
 The committee's next recommendation concerned Section 7.4 (page 7-13). The 
committee recommended adding a Water Policy Recommendation to Section 7.4 as follows:   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
  

Conservation policy and regulations should be designed to recognize and credit water users for conservation practices that they have 
already implemented and target consumptive over nonconsumptive uses as a priority for conservation. Additionally, conservation policy and 
regulations should be designed with an emphasis on cost-effectiveness as a key criterion. 
 Council member Randall Starling said he did not like the word "target" and suggested 
"give priority" as an alternative.  It was also noted that existing conservation should not just be recognized but given credit. After some discussion, the recommendation was 
modified as followed:  

Conservation policy and regulations should be designed to recognize and credit water users for conservation practices that they have already implemented. 
Conservation policies and regulation should give priority to consumptive over nonconsumptive uses as a priority for conservation.  Additionally, conservation 
policy and regulations be designed with an emphasis on cost-effectiveness as a key criterion. 
 The modified language was approved by consensus. 
 The next recommendation involved adding the following New Management Practice on 
page 6-7.  
DM8: Create an awards program to recognized agricultural irrigators for exemplary implementation of best management practices for water conservation. 

-  Program to be modeled after Georgia Forestry Commission awards program for BMP implementation. 
 The council discussed this recommendation, and the discussion focused on whether to 
single out the Georgia Forestry Commission and the need to coordinate with existing Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission programs.  It was suggested that the 
following bullet point be added:  

-  This program should be coordinated with existing Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission programs. 
 The council approved this recommendation, with the addition noted above, by 
consensus.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 The next recommendation concerned DM5 on page 6-6.  At the last meeting, the council 

approved the addition of the following statement to the 2nd bullet point in the description of this management practice to address an EPD comment:  

The Council acknowledges the need to improve drought prediction tools to support earlier notification and supports GAEPD efforts to develop better 
predictive tools.  
To make the statement of the management practice consistent, it was necessary to also modify the language of the management practice as well.  The following was suggested: 
  DM5: Use irrigation suspension only through implementation of the Flint 

River Drought Protection Act, only by voluntary means, with notification to farmers in January as early as possible, and only as a last resort when 
other options are not available to address severe flow depletions.  
The Council discussed this change.  It was noted that early notification to farmers was critical, and if notification was not possible, early indications of the possibility of a 
drought declaration and auction would be helpful.  Tim Cash (EPD) explained the difficulty of EPD making a drought declaration earlier than March 1 without better 
predictive tools given that an irrigation suspension auction could cost the state $20-30 million.  It was noted that March 1 is the statutory deadline for a drought declaration 
under the Flint River Drought Protection Act.    
It was suggested that "as early as possible" be replaced with "before March 1 with possible".  The Council approved this recommendation, with this modification, by 
consensus.  
Two changed were recommended for page 7-12:  
Change the 1st bullet point to read:   

Improve resource assessment modeling through increased use of observed actual water use and resource conditions data 
 Change the 3rd bullet point to read:  
  Increase the number of surface water availability model planning nodes, as 

evaluation points, in the Flint River Basin to support more detailed geographic understanding of water resource conditions. 
 The Council accepted these recommended changes for page 7-12 by consensus. 
   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 Water Quality Committee Report and Recommendations 

 Council member and committee chair Raines Jordan thanked the committee members for 
their work and said the committee had reviewed changes in Jan. 21st draft, discussed further plan revisions, developed recommendations to Council for today's meeting, and 
reviewed new modeling results.  
Raines explained the committee's first recommendation; it concerned management practice WQ4 on page 6-10. In its comments, EPD had asked for more specificity on 
what additional water quality monitoring was recommended. To address this comment, the committee recommends replacing the existing management practice description with 
the following:  

T,   Develop a better information base on water quality conditions to support improved resource assessment in the future.   
T,   Increase sampling sites in the riverine portion of the basin, where data was limited in the water quality resource assessment for this plan. 
T,   Target wet and dry conditions samples to support evaluation of nonpoint source impacts. 
T,   Increase parameters sampled at each sampling location as needed to improve water quality database and future assessments.  
 During discussion, it was suggested that the committee modify the 2rd bullet point to 
read as follows:  

T,   Include more wet weather samples to support evaluation of nonpoint source impacts. 
 The council approved this recommended change, as modified, by consensus. 
 Council member Brant Keller questioned whether the evaluation of use attainment should 
be approached differently in the state.  He said some streams may not be able to support swimming. Some uses may not attainable, and use designations and attainment evaluation 
should be re-evaluated and made more precise.  Kristin suggested referring this issue back to the committee for further discussion and possible development of a 
recommendation to the council.  
The committee's next recommendation concerned the 5th bullet point on page 7-12 in Section 7.4.  The committee suggested modifying the bullet point as follows: 
  T,   Assess baseline implementation of water conservation and water quality Best 

Management Practices by agricultural producers. The lack of information on current levels of implementation limits the ability of conduct effective regional  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
  water planning. The Georgia Forestry Commission currently conducts a field 

survey program to evaluate the extent of BMP implementation by forestry operations.  The results of this survey demonstrate a high level of BMP 
implementation in the forestry sector. For agriculture, a similar evaluation would document baseline levels of implementation, track implementation progress, and 
support future targeting of BMP programs.   
The council discussed whether to include the focus on the Georgia Forestry Commission's program.  It was suggested that it be highlighted as an example of one 
among other programs with a similar purpose.  The council referred this language back to the committee for further discussion and revision. 
 Kristin reminded the council that Brant Keller had suggested that language be added to 
the plan to recognize and credit existing water quality Best Management Practices. To address this request, she suggested language for Section 6.2 similar to that developed for 
water conservation practices (discussed above), as follows:  

Water quality is another priority for the Council. The Council recognizes that a large investment has been made in the region in Best Management 
Practices that have been implemented by municipalities, agriculture, and forestry to protect and improve water quality.  These prior efforts should be 
taken in to account and given credit toward compliance in the design of water quality programs and policies.   
 Council members asked that "industry" be added to the list of sectors having 
implemented Best Management Practice.  By consensus, the Council adopted this language for insertion into Section 6.2, with the addition of "industry" as noted. 
 It was noted that Steve Simpson would report on the new water quality modeling results 
after lunch.  
Plan Review Committee Report and Recommendations   
The Plan Review Committee met on February 2nd.  The committee discussed the January 21st draft and developed recommendation to the council for today's meeting. Kristin 
Rowles presented the committee's recommendations for the council.  
In Table 6-1, Kristin explained that she had taken a first try at noting the priorities of the management practices in the January 21st draft.  The priorities were rated as high, 
medium, and low and noted in the table by color coding (with a key in the table heading).  Kristin said that in discussion with the committee, it was decided to change the priorities 
to high and normal priority (2 categories instead of 3).  Kristin said that the assignment of priorities in the January 21st draft represented best guesses on her part and that she  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 needed to collect input from the council to ensure that the assignments reflected their 

input.  She distributed a hand-out on which members could mark their top three priority management practices.  These worksheets would be used to discuss the assignment of 
priorities in the Plan Review Committee.  She said that the committee had discussed that priorities should be based on the importance of a management practice to attaining the 
council's vision and goals and to addressing identified gaps. The prioritization worksheet was distributed and was collected after lunch. 
 Next, the committee's recommendation concerning the 1st bullet point under Water 
Policy Recommendations on page 7-13 in Section 7.4 was discussed.  The committee suggested the following modified language: 
  T,   The Council recommends that the General Assembly provide funding for 

continued planning by the regional water councils, as described in Section 14 of the Statewide Water Plan, in order to ensure continued progress toward state and 
regional water plan vision and goals. The Council also recommends that the General Assembly provide funding to support monitoring of plan implementation, 
data collection to support future planning, and continued refinement of water resource assessments used in the development of the regional water plans. 
 The committee thought the addition of the reference to the Statewide Water Plan was 
important to note the previous approval of the regional water planning process as a continuing effort by the General Assembly and the Georgia Water Council.  In 
discussion, it was suggested that the 2nd sentence be modified to read:  

The Council also recommends that the General Assembly provide funding to support monitoring of plan implementation, data collection 
to support future planning by the regional water councils, and continued refinement of water resource assessments used in the 
development of the regional water plans.  
The Council approved the committee's recommendation, with the additional modification to the second sentence noted above, by consensus. 
 The committee's next recommendation concerned the 3rd bullet point under Water Policy 
Recommendations on page 7-13 in Section 7.4.  The committee suggested these modifications in order to recognize the recently adopted DNR rules on interbasin 
transfers and to clarify the council's position on interbasin transfers as applying to existing as well as future interbasin transfers.  The following modified language was 
recommended by the committee:  

\Gamma   The Council urges the Georgia General Assembly and other state policymakers not to preclude interbasin transfer as an option for future  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
  water management in the region, as needed and following thorough 

scientific evaluation. Interbasin transfers of water exist in many places in Georgia at this time. The Council recognizes that interbasin transfers 
(existing and future) can play an important role in water resource management. Interbasin transfers of water can provide supply or flows to a 
receiving basin where water is needed. Rules recently adopted by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources in January 2011 will help to ensure 
that future permits for interbasin transfers are thoroughly evaluated.    
The council members discussed interbasin transfers and the recently adopted DNR rules that apply to interbasin transfers.  Council members also noted that at least one bill 
seeking to limit or ban interbasin transfers had been introduced this legislative session.  It was noted that there are no guarantees that policy would not change on this issue in the 
future. Interbasin transfers have frequently been a topic of legislative bills in recent years.  Chairman Chase said that interbasin transfers should not be opposed when they make 
sense.  Members thought the new DNR rules would provide for more thorough evaluation of interbasin transfer requests in the future.  Kristin said she would see if a summary of 
the new rules is available that could be sent to the council. The council adopted the recommended modification, as proposed, by consensus. 
 Next, the committee's recommendation concerned the last bullet point under Water 
Policy Recommendations in Section 7.4 was discussed.  The committee suggested the following modified language to emphasize that the recommendation related to resolution 
of the ACF tri-state water litigation:  

\Gamma   The Council supports timely settlement of the interstate water litigation in the ACF.  The Council recommends that the General Assembly and other 

state policymakers should consider the development of an interstate compact for the ACF Basin. If any regional management institutions are 
created in the Basin, they would need the capacity to operate as a part of that compact. The Council recognizes the examples of the Great Lakes 
Basin Compact, several of the Texas river basin compacts (i.e. Sabine River Compact Commission) and other successful stakeholder led water 
councils managing large river basins that cross geopolitical boundaries such as the Fraser River Basin Council ( British Columbia, Canada). 
Collective legislative action involving Georgia, Alabama, and Florida would be needed to develop such a compact. 
 The Council discussed the recommendation.  Kristin said that she had imported this 
recommendation and the one above with slight modifications from the Middle Chattahoochee plan, after discussion of this issue at the last council meeting.  The 
Council had asked Kristin to use the Middle Chattahoochee recommendations on this topic for develop draft lanaguage for their plan. She asked the council whether the part of  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 the recommendation regarding an inter-state compact met their interests. It was suggested 

that if an compact were developed, the regional councils would need to be parties to that compact and not just having "the capacity to operate as a part of that compact."  While 
some liked the specific examples of other inter-state compacts, others did not want to specifically endorse those compacts. It was decided to refer this recommendation back 
to the Plan Review Committee for further discussion and the development of a recommendation for the council.  
 Next, the committee presented for consideration three joint recommendations from the 
joint council meeting on January 27, 2011:  T,   The Upper Flint, Lower Flint-Ochlockonee, and Middle Chattahoochee Councils 

recognize the critical need for more storage in the Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint (ACF) System and recommend that a plan for additional storage be 
developed and implemented and that it consider the following options: better utilization of existing storage in the Chattahoochee, new storage in the Flint, and 
enhancement of existing storage capacity. T,   The Upper Flint, Lower Flint-Ochlockonee, and Middle Chattahoochee Councils 
urge GAEPD and those involved in the resource assessment modeling to improve upon existing models for future regional water planning by making greater use of 
actual and current data on water use and conditions and by developing assumptions that more closely approximate actual conditions.   
T,   The Upper Flint, Lower Flint-Ochlockonee, and Middle Chattahoochee Councils request that state and federal agencies reevaluate the scientific justification for 

the minimum flow requirements at Woodruff Dam that are intended to maintain healthy aquatic ecosystems. 
 The Council members asked that the word "options" be deleted after "following" from 
the 1st recommendation. Some expressed concern that these recommendations would be viewed as more important than the council's other recommendations, but it was noted 
that these are important.  Several suggestions were made regarding how these recommendations are presented.  It was suggested that the overlap of these 
recommendations with the Council's own recommendations be described and that it be noted that the Council's recommendations supersede these recommendations.  It was also 
suggested that the presentation of the recommendation be revised so that the names of all three councils are not repeated at the beginning of each recommendation.  Kristin will 
develop introductory language to the recommendations based on these suggestions.  By consensus, the council approved these three joint recommendations, with the 
modification noted above regarding the word "options".     
   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 13  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 The committee's last recommendation concerned management practice SF5 on page 6-

10.  The committee recommended adding the following statement to the management practice description: 
  T,   A full range of storage options should be evaluated, including (but not limited to) 

increasing the capacity of existing reservoirs and creating new off-stem reservoirs.   
 Dick Morrow explained that the committee did not want to create a perception that the 
council was only advocating for a mainstem reservoir, and therefore added the examples of increasing the capacity of existing reservoirs and building new off-stem reservoirs.  
The Council discussed this recommendation extensively.  Some were very concerned that the council was not taking on the issue directly enough.  They felt all options should be 
considered, including a mainstem reservoir, and they did not believe that this modification reflected that view.  Council members noted that this was a difficult 
decision, but that the council should not shy away from it because it was difficult.  It was agreed that in place of the above recommended language, the following will be added: 
"A full range of storage and reservoir options should be evaluated."  The council adopted this change by consensus. 
 Lunch 
 Over lunch, the council had a presentation on Weyerhauser operations and environmental 
programs from Vice President Bob Williams.  
Water Quality Modeling Update  
Steve Simpson provided an update concerning the water quality modeling. Steve reminded the council that the surface water quality modeling is about modeling the 
assimilative capacity of the waterbodies.  The assimilative capacity is the ability of the waterbodies to receive pollution without violating water quality standards.   
 Steve explained that the dissolved oxygen (DO) models are run at "critical conditions" 
(low flow, high temperature) with permitted discharges. He noted that the watershed models account for both wastewater discharges and storm water runoff from various land 
uses. Lake models look at the impacts of nutrients.  Steve said that models in general identify "unacceptable impacts" as not meeting state standards for dissolved oxygen, 
nutrients, chlorophyll a, etc. Steve explained modeling deliverables included the following: 
  

T,   Lake Modeling -  Lanier 

-  West Point -  Walter F. George 
-  Seminole -  Blackshear 
T,   Watershed -  Lanier 

-  Chattahoochee -  Flint 

T,   Dissolved Oxygen -  Chattahoochee 

-  Flint -  Tallapoosa 
-  Ochlockonee  T,   Hydrodynamic 
-  Middle Chattahoochee -  Lower Chattahoochee 
-  Flint 
 Steve said the results from the modeling can be a bit overwhelming. There are many 
calculated numeric results at over 40 summation points in the Flint basin.  Steve said for this presentation, a few key locations will be highlighted, including:  

\Gamma   Montezuma 
\Gamma   Lake Blackshear 
\Gamma   Below Lake Worth 
\Gamma   Bainbridge 
\Gamma   Spring Creek 
\Gamma   Fish Pond Drain  

Steve discussed the following graphs which show the contributions from point and non-point sources in pounds per year. Nitrogen and phosphorus trends are somewhat similar. 

  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 15  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 Next, Steve showed selected nutrient modeling results on maps of the basin. For the Flint 

watershed, Steve said that, in general, nonpoint sources currently contribute more nutrients than point sources.  Future increases in nutrient loads will come from nonpoint 
contributions from changing land uses and significant increases in point source contributions. 
 

  
Steve then summarized Lake Blackshear modeling results. He said that no nutrient standards were yet established for the lake. Phosphorus loading into lake is primarily 

from nonpoint sources. Lake Seminole results are similar.  Seminole also has not nutrient standards yet established. Phosphorus loading to Lake Seminole is primarily from 
nonpoint sources. Future phosphorus increases in Seminole will be primarily point source related. 
 Steve summarized the proposed Florida nutrient standards and presented some potential 
Council considerations, including:  T,   Dissolved Oxygen 

-  Increased flow will require increased treatment T,   Lake and Watershed Modeling   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 16  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
  -  Modeling indicates types of management practices that might be most 

effective in reducing nutrients -  Relative contribution of point & nonpoint sources of nutrients  
-  Variability in results from year to year -  Comparison with existing water quality standards 
T,   Future Considerations -  Expanded data collection 

-  Modeling tool improvements for future updates -  Florida nutrient standards potential impacts 
 Council member Brant Keller expressed concern about the Florida phosphorus standard.  
Council member Cliff Arnett said the Council needs a target; the modeling results do not identify any clear issues for the next ten years. He said the council may need to define 
short term objectives versus long-term objectives. Steve Simpson commented that there is still uncertainty regarding what the Florida nutrient standards will be after the current 
litigation.  There is also still uncertainty regarding how U.S. Army Corps of Engineers will manage ACF lakes in the future.  Council member Brant Keller said it would be hard 
to identify a nutrient target. He said that the Council does not have enough information to do recommend anything dramatic without clearly knowing what the target is. 
 Council member Cliff Arnett commented that use attainment could not be assessed based 
on these results.  Council member Brant Keller said that nonpoint sources will be important in the future. Council member Raines Jordan said that more water quality 
monitoring is recommended by the council and it should be a priority. Cliff Arnett said that the results do not indicate a problem, but only show a change in condition.  In 
closing, Steve Simpson said that the results and the council's recommendations related to the results would be discussed at the next water quality committee meeting. 
 Energy Forecasts Follow-up Discussion 
 Kristin reminded the council that they had a presentation at the last council meeting on 
energy section water demand forecasts.  She noted that the region currently does not have any thermoelectric electricity production, but it does have hydroelectric production at 
Lake Blackshear.  She reviewed the statewide forecasts for energy demands and related water demands.   
 For the region, she provided the following summary statistics: 
 

UPPER FLI NT REGI ONAL ENERGY DEMAND 

  2010  2050   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 17  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 

OPB Population_UFL   245,827 401,059 

Calculated Population Based 
Energy Demand_UFL (GWh)  4370  6,723 

I nstalled Generating Capacity 
in the Upper Flint Region 
(GWh)  

114  114 

Note: I nstalled generating capacity for the Upper Flint Region includes Lake Blackshear 
Dam operated by the Crisp County Power Commission. Estimate represents an overinflated value of actual achievable annual energy production (=  13 MW x 365 x 24 /  1,000 
=  114 GWh)  

 Kristin reminded the council that for the statewide energy demand forecasts, the location 

of additional capacity (beyond 2020) was not specified because it was unknown.  It was estimated that this additional capacity would require consumptive water use of 170-189 
mgd.  She asked if the council would like to address the unallocated capacity in its plan.  Members noted concern with additional water consumption in the region given the 
downstream gap and noted that power generation capacity would best be suited to areas that do not have surface water availability concerns.  Dick Morrow said that a transition 
to electric car use could greatly increase the demand for electricity production in the state. The council referred the development of wording regarding the council's position 
for the energy section (Section 4.4) to the Water Quantity committee. The committee will ask council member Mike Donnelly to participate in the discussion. 
 Shared Resources Discussion 
 Kristin said that there was a need for discussion of nodes shared with the SuwanneeSatilla Council in the small area of overlap with the Suwannee Basin.  Information to support this discussion is being developed, and it will be discussed at the next council 
meeting.  
Review of Outstanding issues/Plan to Finalize WDCP May 2nd Submittal Kristin asked the council if there were outstanding issues that would require discussion 
prior to finalization of the plan for May 2.  
Vice-Chair Dick Morrow described a new engineering study by Griffin to dredge and raise one of the city's existing reservoirs. He said they would be pursuing state funds 
from GEFA for this project.  He asked the Council if they would be willing to support this project. Chairman Chase said that while he supports the effort, he thought it may be 
in the Council's best interest to get the plan worked out and submitted before we endorse a specific project.   
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 18  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 Kristin reviewed a list of outstanding issues identified at today's meeting, and she 

identified which committees would address each issue:  
Water Quality Committee: New modeling results, Use Attainment Discussion (for Section 7.4 recommendations), Georgia Forestry Commission wording (Section 7.4) 
 Water Quantity Committee: Shared resources discussion with Suwannee-Satilla, 
wording for energy section (Section 4.4)  
Plan Review Committee:  Wording for interstate issues recommendation (Section 7.4), management practices prioritization, review of sections 7 &8 
 Kristin noted that the Division of Wildlife Resources was expected to turn in comments 
related to Section 3 of the plan.  She would share these comments with the appropriate committee for consideration and discussion. 
 Kristin asked the council whether they had any issues to add to the above list.  They did 
not.  
Kristin discussed with the council the schedule from today to May 2, when the plan is due to EPD for release to public comment.  One more council meeting will be held before 
May 2, and Kristin suggested that the council meeting be held in mid-April. After that meeting, final revisions can be made to the plan.  The council can be given an 
opportunity to review final revisions by e-mail, and the Plan Review Committee can address any last-minute issues during that time.  
 Given that schedule for a council meeting, Kristin sketched out the following schedule 
for committee meetings:  
Week of February 28th: Distribution of new draft plan; Water Quality Committee meeting Week of March 14th: Plan Review, Water Quantity, and Water Quality Committee 

meetings  Week of March 28th: Committee meetings as needed 
Week of April 11th/18th: Council meeting Week of April 25th: Plan Review Committee meeting (if needed) 
May 2, 2011: Submittal of Plan to EPD  
After May 2, 2011, Kristin said that there will be a public comment period to review the draft regional plans from all of the councils.  Tim Cash said that the length of the 
comment period was not yet known, but it would likely be 30-60 days.  He said that EPD was working on an online tool that will be used to collect the public comments. 
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 19  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 Kristin asked the Council if they would like to have the changes marked in the next draft.  

They said that they would like only the changes made after today to be marked.    
 Local Elected Officials and Public Comments  
There were no local elected officials or members of the public that signed up to address the council. 
 Wrap-Up  
 The Council selected the week of April 11th or April 19th to have Council Meeting 10.  
Lake Blackshear was suggested as a location.  Kristin said she would send a scheduling survey to select the council meeting date, and she will look into the meeting location.  
Council members expressed an interest in holding a celebration at the next council meeting if possible. 
 A meeting evaluation was distributed, and the council meeting was adjourned. 
    

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 20  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 
 Attachment 1:  

Upper Flint Water Planning Council  Council Meeting Attendance - February 7, 2011 
 Council Members 
Clifford Arnett Hays Arnold 
Michael Bowens Gene Brunson 
Donald Chase Raines Jordan 
Frank Keller Brant Keller 

Buddy Leger Dick Morrow 
Lamar Perlis Gary Powell 
Jim Reid Charles Rucks 
Bill Sawyer Randall Starling 
  Council Members Not In Attendance  

Greg Barineau Mike Beres 
Tommy Burnsed William Culpepper 
Mike Donnelly Beth English 

Harold Fallin Eddie Freeman 
Jack Holbrook George Hooks 
Terrell Hudson Lynmore James 

Planning Contractors Robert Osborne, B&V 
Kristin Rowles, GWPPC   Steve Simpson, B&V Mark Masters, GWPPC 
Georgia EPD  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  
Bill Morris  
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 21  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 9  February 12, 2011 
Meeting Date: February 7, 2011 

 

  osb16387 46 35 8 17 4 111 2 136 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - 20110207_UFL_CM9_MEETING_MINUTESxxx.docx UFL_CM9_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2 