

B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.3  

September 23, 2011 
  

  
To:    Upper Flint Water Planning Council  
From:    Kristin Rowles, GWPPC, and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch  
cc:     Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD  
Subject:   Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 11 on September 21, 2011  
 The council meeting was held on Septembe r 21, 2011, at the Griffin Commissioner's 
Meeting Room in Griffin, Georgia. The list of  attendees is attached.  In addition to this summary, all the presentations (slides) discus sed in this meeting will be posted on the 
Upper Flint Council's web portal (http://www.upperflint.org/).  
Welcome, Introductions and Chairman's discussion  
Chairman Donald Chase called the meeting to  order and thanked everyone for attending.  Dick Morrow welcomed attendees to Gri ffin. Donald Chase led the group in an 
invocation.    
Chairman Chase reported on activities since the last meeting, including submitting the plan to EPD and the public comment and di rection received from EPD. Chase also 
briefed members on his meeting with Gary  Black (Agriculture Commissioner), Senator Ross Tolleson, Senator Tom McCall, and others in Macon, GA in July to discuss regional 
water planning issues. Chase said that he re ported to that group  that additional water storage was the number one priority.  He  said that funding and continuation of the 
councils was also discussed as important.    
Chase briefed the council on the panel presentation that he and other chairs attended at the Georgia Environmental Conference in Savannah in August.  Chairs of the Middle 
Chattahoochee, Lower-Flint Ochlockonee, and  other representatives were in attendance and participated on a panel discussion.  Chase sa id that most of the questions asked of the 
panel concerned reservoirs and locations.  
The meeting agenda was reviewed and the m eeting summary from CM10 was discussed; however, action on these items was deferred as  the meeting was one member short of a 
quorum (17 voting members).  
  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 2  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 Discussion of EPD Direction to the Councils 

 Chairman Chase asked Tim Cash of EPD to  discuss the letter  from EPD regarding 
direction on completion of the plan.  The letter, signed by Linda McGregor, is included in the pre-meeting packet (see page 18). Tim Ca sh summarized that the letter advised that 
additional detail on conservation was needed  and that the public comments received needed to be considered. EPD's review wa s directed at ensuring that the plan was 
developed in accordance with existing statewide water planning legislation and EPD guidance.  Cash added that EPD appreciates  the work of the Council.  Donald Chase said 
that he appreciated all of the Council's work on the plan.  
Review of comments on plan  
Kristin Rowles said that she would be reviewing comments on the plan from the state and regional agencies and from the public. She  said that the detailed agency comments, 
primarily from EPD, start on page 20 of the  plan. In addition to EPD, the plan was reviewed by GEFA and the River Valley Re gional Commission, but these agencies had 
very few comments. The comment s from EPD include the general comments in the letter included in the pre-meeting packet from Linda  McGregor, but also include more detailed 
comments from EPD reviewers, which are al so included in the pre-meeting packet (starting on page 20). Slides summarizing  the review of the agency comments are 
included on the council website. After considering the agency comments, Rowles will review and facilitate discussion of the public comments on the plan. 
 Section 7.4 
 Rowles said that in Section 7.4 there was an editing error by which an old and a new 
version of a recommendation were both included in the plan.  The older version (3 rd full bullet point on page 7-18) had been  replaced with the newer version (2 nd full bullet point 
on page 7-18) based on the Council's disc ussion and decision at  its April council meeting.  Rowles said that council member  Randy Starling had pointed out this error in 
his comments submitted on the plan. Rowles said that her recommendation was to delete the 3rd full bullet point on page 7-18.  There were no objections to this recommendation, 
and it was adopted by consensus.  However, Ro wles noted that base d on discussion with council members, it seemed there might be  a need to discuss the wording of the 2 nd full 
bullet point on page 7-18 further.  She asked Randy Starling to comment.  
Council member Randy Starling presented his  concern that the recommendation states that "revenue raising authority should be considered for these councils." Starling said that 
after further reflection on the issue and follow-up discussion with other council members, he is concerned that the current language ma y lead to unintended consequences.  Starling 
recommended that the language be changed  to read something like: revenue raising authority, though not necessarily recommen ded, should be considered...."  Randy  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 3  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 Starling offered this proposed change as a motion to continue discussion of this issue, and 

Mike Donnelly seconded the motion.  Chairm an Chase noted that the Council did not have a quorum yet (one person short), but coul d proceed with discussion to explore the 
issue.  
Dick Morrow said that he was not in favor  of this change, because local control of planning will require funding  to accomplish, and the proposed change weakens the 
recommendation. Cliff Arnett said th at the language in the plan (2 nd bullet point) was previously approved by consensus with much di scussion. Moreover, he said that he is not 
in favor of the proposed cha nge as history has indicated  that no action happens without funding. Raines Jordan said that the "revenue  raising" language includes a number of 
funding options and that local funding is needed for local control.  Buddy Leger said that he understands the concern, and  respects Starling for raising it,  but he thinks that the 
existing language is good. Lamar Perlis  questioned whether stronger language was needed.  Brant Keller advised that he is not  supportive of the cha nge.  Terrell Hudson 
said that he is concerned that the recomme ndation, as written, provides for a new level of bureaucracy. Chairman Chase said that the  Council's philosophical differences will not 
be resolved in the meeting, and he is in fa vor of the current language.  Hays Arnold said that the critical water issues in the state will require that all options should be on the table 
and therefore the existing language to "consid er..." is appropriate.  Frank Keller noted that the plan is a recommendation, so the language as currently proposed is fine. 
 Chairman Chase noted that the council was st ill lacking a quorum.  He asked for a straw 
poll on the motion.  The straw poll indicated  that council members  Randy Starling, Mike Donnelly, Frank Keller, and Terrell Hudson  were in favor of Starlings proposed 
modification. Mike Donnelly noted that he  has received negative feedback on the current language from outside the council, and he also  thinks that it is unlikely that the councils 
would be granted revenue rais ing authority by the legislat ure. Donnelly said that he would withdraw his second for the motion, and the motion died for lack of a second. 
 Joel Wood joined the meeting by teleconference, and the council had a quorum.   
 Section 6 - DM2 
 EPD: Page 6-4, DM2, and subsequent referenc es to DM2: The current wording of DM2 
is not consistent with current state law, which obligates the Director to require involuntary suspension of irriga tion under certain circumstances. Consider revising to 
read primarily through voluntary means or other wording that reflects the Council's intent but is consistent with state law. 
 RECOMMENDATION: Suggest that the Council  move this management practice to the 
Recommendations to the State section since  it is a recommendation for modification of current policy, which does allow for involunta ry suspension.  While implementation of  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 4  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 the recommendation would not require a statut ory change, it does set preferences for how 

current law and policy are implemented (e.g., avoid involuntary suspension).  
Following discussion, there was a consensus to approve the recommended change to move this item from the management practices section to the recommendations section. 
 Conservation 
 EPD comments are included in the pre-meeting packet on pages 23 & 24.  Rowles 
reviewed several points related to the EPD comments: 

\Gamma   Specific conservation practices are clearly  listed in the description column of Table 6-1 for Management Practices DM3, DM5, DM6, and DM7.   

\Gamma   The selection process, key points, calculations, and decisions are described in the Water Conservation Technical Memorandum (Supplemental Document 15).   
\Gamma   The Council states in DM6 on page 6- 6, "A focus on desired performance outcome will support increased conservati on while allowing farmers to select 

what practices will work best for their own operations."O/  
\Gamma   The DM6 description lists conservation pract ices that might be used to meet the stated conservation benchmark.   

\Gamma   This is the Council's preferred approach to conservation in agricultural water use.   
\Gamma   Page 1 of the Water Conservation Tec hnical Memorandum explains the heavy focus on agricultural uses: "Table 1 shows the current (2005) and forecast future 

(2050) water withdrawals in the region. Agriculture is the largest water use sector. Much of the Council's discussion focused  on this sector, but other sectors were 
also discussed, and management practices we re included in the plan to address all sectors." 
\Gamma   While the Council focused most heavily  on agricultural uses due to their predominance, it addresses conservation fo r non-farm uses (municipal, industrial, 

energy) in DM3 and DM4. Specific practi ces from the DNR Rules, State Water Plan, and Water Stewardship are cited in  the description column of Table 6-1 for 
these management practices. The plan also addresses the need for information on baseline implementation of these practices by non-farm uses in the 
Recommendations in Section 7.4. 
\Gamma   Cost information considered is given in Table 7-2.  Estimates are largely based on the Supplemental Guidance on costs, with several modifications and corrections 

made in discussions with the contractor that developed that document.  
\Gamma   It was not possible to estimate total costs  for many practices because the extent of current implementation is unknown.  The need for baseline implementation 

information is described in the plan, a nd the plan includes recommendations to address this information need.  The costs  of irrigation suspension are estimated in 
the Water Conservation Technical Memo (Supplemental Document 15).  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 5  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 

\Gamma   Calculating water savings for the practi ces listed in Table 6-1, DM3 and DM4, would be very rough estimates, give n the lack of available baseline 

implementation information.  Some would also be limited by the qualitative nature of the practices (e.g., submittal  of conservation plans by withdrawal 
permittees).  
 RECOMMENDATION: Add the following to the Water Conservation Technical 
Memorandum in Section 2:  

Costs for demand management practices  and other types of management practices are estimated in Table 7-1 of  the plan.  Cost estimates are for broad 
categories of practices, but allow for some cost comparison.  The total costs of implementation were not possible to estimate because of the lack of baseline 
implementation information.  The Council recommends the assessment of baseline implementation of conservation  practices in Section 7.4 of the plan.  
Cost is an important factor in select ing management practices, but the Council did not use this information to set a preference for one type of practice over 
another, because the Council recognizes that all types of management practices will be needed in the region.   
 Furthermore, for agriculture, the  Council recognizes that costs for 
management practice implementation can  vary widely depending on location specific conditions, and therefore  the Council recommends benchmark 
performance targets for agricultural water conservation rather than calling for the use of specific practices.  Selec tion of the most a ppropriate, specific 
practices for agricultural water conservation is left to the farmer.  
Cliff Arnett suggested that the technical  memorandum be modified to state that the planning process is an iterative  process, and future iterations  would be expected to have 
better cost definition.  Following discussion, there wa s a consensus to approve this recommendation with Arnett's suggested modification. 
 RECOMMENDATION:  Add a new last paragr aph on page 1 on the Water Conservation 
Technical Memorandum as follows:   

In Section 3, this memorandum calculate s water savings to the extent possible for several conservation management pr actices listed in Section 2.  Water 
savings estimates are focused on those areas where the best information to support estimates was available.  However, the Council's plan includes 
management practices that address all  water use sectors, and it addresses the need for better information on baseline implementation of conservation 
practices and the effectiveness of those practices.  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 6  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
   

Following discussion, there was consensus to approve this recommendation.  
RECOMMENDATION:  Add new water savings  estimates for selected non-farm water conservation practices to the Water Conservation Technical Memorandum. 
 Steve Simpson explained that the B&V team  can add some estimates for water savings 
from specific municipal and industrial cons ervation practices included in the Water Stewardship Act. Simpson explained that the suggested  recommendation came from 
comparing our technical memorandum with thos e of other councils.  At least one other council included an estimate of coolin g tower and multi-family sub-metering 
conservation savings. This amount of deta il was not included as these savings are expected to be very small and the council  chose to focus largely on agricultural water 
conservation as this component of water use  is greater for the c ouncil.  Simpson noted that the estimates would be for these Wate r Stewardship Act requ ired practices going 
forward.    
Various council members questioned the need to add this level of detail to the technical memo.  Following discussion, the consensus was for Black & Veatch to develop the 
estimate and provide the draft language fo r review by Randy Starling, Brant Keller, Cliff Arnett, and Hays Arnold prior to finalization. 
 Section 3 
 RECOMMENDATION: To address some of the pub lic comments, need to clarify in the 
notes to Figures 3-1 through  3-4 (page 3-2) and 4-1 and  4-2 (page 4-6) that demand estimates and forecasts are for the planning region, not to a specific watershed. 
 Rowles recommended this change fo r clarification based on comments;  there was 
consensus to make this change.  
Executive Summary  
EPD suggests (see pages 20 & 26 of the pre-meeting packet):  
(1) In the table titled "Resource Assessm ent Results -UF Region", for Surface Water Quality under the column titled Summary of  Model Results, it states that "results 
indicated decreasing availability of assimilative capacity in streams as discharge flows increase".  EPD recommended that  it should be noted here that  in certain segments of the 
Flint watershed the model indicates that no assimilative capacity is left. (2) In the column titled "Council Plan to Address Results", suggest wording could be 
changed to: "Collect more complete informa tion to confirm model results and to support the targeting of management practices for water quality in the future."  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 7  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
  

RECOMMENDATION: Adopt these suggested changes.  
Council consensus was NOT to add the suggested note in item 1, because the model-identified areas with no assimilative capacity  left are not in the UF region.  For item 
(2), the council consensus was to reword the  suggested change in item 2, as follows:  "Collect more complete information to su pport refinement of the model to reflect 
actual conditions and to support the target ing of management practices for water quality in the future." 
 Section 3 
 Several comments from EPD are included on pages 20 and 21 of the pre-meeting packet.   
 RECOMMENDATION:  Adopt suggested change s. For page 3-8, modify the last 
paragraph as follows:  

Figure 3-5 shows the  in-stream dissolved oxygen (DO) model results for current discharges given critical lo w flow (7Q10), high temperature 
conditions. Stream segments that we re predicted by the model to have exceeded the available assimilative capacity are shown in red.  Streams that 
are at the allowable DO leve ls are shown in pink, and  those predicted to have DO levels in excess of state water quality standards are shown in blue. 
Naturally low DO waters (below 5.0 mg /L in the summer) are typically in the yellow to red range.  It is important to note that some streams are 
naturally low in DO, but  these streams cannot ne cessarily be discerned from in Figure 3-5 because the map indicates the effects of discharges as 
well as natural conditi ons for all streams.  Assimilative capacity appears to be available for stream reaches in  the region based on dissolved oxygen 
modeling results. The number of str eam miles where assimilative capacity was exceeded or unavailable under cu rrent conditions in the model was 
8.80 miles (as a whole).  
After discussion, there was consensus to approve these recommended changes.  
Section 4  
A comment from EPD regarding Section 4.4 is  included on page 22 of the pre-meeting packet.   
 RECOMMENDATION: Delete "for EPD by CDM,  Inc.", so that the 1st sentence of 
Section 4.4 reads: "Forecasts of water use  in thermoelectric power production were made  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 8  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 for EPD by CDM, Inc.,  with the guidance of an advi sory panel that included power 

industry representatives and the Georgia Environmental Facilities Authority."O/  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Section 5  
Comments from EPD regarding Section 5 ar e included on page 22 of the pre-meeting packet.   
 EPD:  
  (1) The estimated 2050 groundwater withdrawal numbers for the Cretaceous Aquifer 

in Table 5-1 (page 5-3) should be 267- 303 mgd (and the equivalent cfs numbers should be adjusted accordingly). 
(2) Page 5-4, last paragraph  in Section 5.2, modify 1 st sentence as follows: "As discussed in Section 3, the sustainable yield results for the Upper Floridan aquifer 

in the Dougherty Plain we re determined based upon th e impact of groundwater withdrawals on  groundwater contributions  to stream baseflows,   surface  water 
flows, rather than on the condition of the aquifer itself.  (3) Page 5-5, Figure 5-1, in the table that compares current and future assimilative 
capacity, the "at assimila tive" and "exceeds assimila tive capacity" stream segments are added together so it appear s things get worse in the future.  In 
several 2050 models there is a decrease in segments that "exceed assimilative capacity." Recommend adding a column to the table to show "at" and "exceed" as 
separate categories. Also note, the 2050  model represented the scenario whereby all the facilities had permit limits adjusted  so as not to exceed the assimilative 
capacity of the streams into which they  discharged - which resulted in no red zones.   
 Following discussion, the consensus was to adopt these suggested changes. 
 Section 7  
 GEFA suggested that in Table  7-2 (on page 7-7), the Council  should consider adding the 
Georgia Land Conservation Program as a re sponsible party for  item WQ-2 (Improve Implementation of Nonpoint Source Controls). 
 Following discussion, the consensus was to adopt this suggested change. 
  
EPD suggested that the footnote b in Ta ble 7-2 should be clarified.  Rowles recommended deleting the word "saved" in the  first line of note (b).   The note applies to  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 9  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 both "saved" and "yielded" water, and if so  described, the note is appropriately placed 

throughout the table.  
The consensus was to adopt this suggested change.  
Section 8  
EPD commented that on page 8-4, "trie nnial" should actually be "biennial".   After clarification, the consensus was to adopt this correction. 
 Formatting and Presentation 
 Comments on formatting and presentation from EPD are included on page 25 of the premeeting packet.    
RECOMMENDATION: Planning c ontractor will incorporate suggested changes and corrections into final plan. Planning contractor will review document for consistency with 
style templates.  
There were no objections to this recommendation, and it was approved by consensus.  
Following the review of the agency comments, Dick Morrow made a motion to approve all of the approved changes, with modifica tions as discussed above, for incorporation 
into the finalized plan. Frank Keller s econded the motion, and the motion was approved by consensus. 
 Public Comments 
 Next, Rowles reviewed the public comments  on the plan.  She said that members had 
been sent the full comment document, w ith over 280 pages of comments on all ten regional plans.  She also referred to a summary notes documents prepared by the 
planning contractor review team in their  review of the public comments.  This was provided to the council to assist them in  their review, but not to substitute for the 
comments themselves.  Rowles noted that th e public comments reflected a substantial amount of work on the part of the reviewers.   She provided the following as a list of 
reviewers in the public comments whose comments applied to the UF region:  
 The public comments were discussed.  Comm ents were received from a number of 
sources, including:  

\Gamma   Ross King, Association of County Commissioners 
\Gamma   Jenny Hoffner and Gordon Rogers, Flint Riverkeeper and American Rivers  

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 10  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 

\Gamma   Stephen McCullers, Cobb County Water System 
\Gamma   Zippy Duvall, GA Farm Bureau 
\Gamma   Tammy Wyles, GA Industry Environmental Coalition 
\Gamma   Tanya Blalock, GA Power 
\Gamma   Katie Kirkpatrick, GA Water Alliance 
\Gamma   GA Water Coalition 
\Gamma   James Phillips, Middle Chattahoochee Water Coalition 
\Gamma   Sara Barczak, Southern Alliance for Clean Energy 
\Gamma   Shelly Lakly, Nature Conservancy 
\Gamma   Billy Turner, Tri Rivers Waterway Development Association 
\Gamma   Sandy Tucker, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
\Gamma   Sally Bethea on behalf of several GA Riverkeepers 
\Gamma   Jack Gleason 
\Gamma   Deborah Phillips, GA Industry Environmental Coalition 
\Gamma   Bryan Tolar, GA Agribusiness Council 
\Gamma   Randall Starling 
\Gamma   William Moore  

Next, Rowles reviewed the major themes in the public comments:  

\Delta   Implementation concerns 
\Delta   Continuation of regional planning 
\Delta   Resource assessment data, approach, targets 
\Delta   Forecasts (growth scenarios, energy) 
\Delta   Conservation priority 
\Delta   Storage concerns 
\Delta   Gap closure 
\Delta   Council membership 
\Delta   In-stream flow needs 
\Delta   Water quality concerns  

Rowles noted that many comments addressed  concerns that were  beyond the Council's control.  For example, many comments a ddressed the resource assessments, and these 
were mostly directed at EPD.  The Counc il also had concerns  about the resource assessments, in many cases similar to those raised in the public comments. Rowles noted 
that the Council was directed by EPD to consider the public comments and determine if it wanted to modify the plan based on the public comments.   
  
   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 11  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 The Council discussed the public comments r eceived. Dick Morrow noted that comments 

came from a number of specific and varied intere sts. Hays Arnold said that he did not see a need to change the plan. Similarly, Raines  Jordan said that he did not see any issues 
raised in the publ ic comments that the Council had not  considered.  Cliff Arnett noted that the public comments are appreciated, and  that the council agr eed with many of the 
comments, but that he feels the council has  done an admirable job of  considering issues and developing the plan. Buddy Leger stated that public comments are appreciated.    
 The Council discussed that no formal response  to comments is re quired by the Council; 
however, the Council would like to expr ess its appreciation to commenters.  Buddy Leger made a motion to convey the council's appr eciation to commenters on the website and 
in the meeting summary. Fr ank Keller seconded, and th e motion was approved by consensus.  
 Dick Morrow said that he disagreed with so me comments; examples were comments that 
"aggressive water conservation was not c onsidered" and the council had made an "unbalanced jump to additional storage".  Dick expressed that the Council had considered 
water conservation and other options, but believes that additional storage is needed to address the gap the lower Flint basin. Cliff Arnett voiced his agreement with Dick.  Frank 
Keller noted the USFWS comments on endangere d species. Lamar Perlis suggested that an appreciation letter be sent to the comme nters.  Randy Starling noted that commenters 
did a good job representing their perspectives  in the comments.  A council member asked for clarification of how the  New Mexico per capita water use calculation works.  Steve 
Simpson said that the planning contractors  had reviewed the New Mexico method, and it is very similar to that used (in terms of factors considered) in this planning process.  
 Donald Chase agreed that the council shoul d send a letter to commenters; the letter 
should cover the following points:   

\Gamma   The council appreciates the  time and efforts of comment ers in reviewing the plan and providing written comments. 
\Gamma   The council does not believe the planning  effort is complete; additional work needs to be done. 
\Gamma   The council has requested additional information to improve future planning. 
\Gamma   The council is in favor of the planning process continuing forward. 
\Gamma   The council asks commenters to continue  their involvement in the future planning process efforts. 

 The planning contractor will work with  Chairman Chase to prepare and distribute 
such a letter to commenters.   

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 12  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 Following this discussion, Cliff Arnett made  a motion to make no further changes in 

the plan based on the pub lic comments. Brant Keller seconded the motion, and the motion was approved by consensus. 
 Dick Morrow made a motion to approve the CM10 meeting summary. The motion was 
seconded, and the motion was approved by consensus.  
Cliff Arnett commented that one of the best  decisions that the council made was to elect Donald Chase as chairman and Dick Morrow as vice chairman. 
 Raines Jordan asked about the future of th e regional water planni ng councils. Tim Cash 
(EPD) said that Black & Veatch  surveyed the councils for th eir interest in reappointment, and the results were provided to the EPD dir ector for sharing with  the state leadership 
team. Cash said that discussions were cu rrently on-going regarding planning continuance and budgeting for this effort in the future.  Beth English advised  that the GA Municipal 
Association has the continuation of the wate r councils and regional water planning on its legislative agenda.   
 Lamar Perlis and Buddy Leger announced to the  council that Cordele is now officially an 
"Inland Port", connected by rail to Savannah, and the first shipment has been made.   
Kristin Rowles thanked everyone for their efforts. The meeting was adjourned.  
     

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 13  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting 11  September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 
 Attachment 1:  

Upper Flint Water Planning Council  Council Meeting Attendance - September 21, 2011 
 Council Members 
      Cliff Arnett Hays Arnold 

Gene Brunson Donald Chase 
Mike Donnelly Beth English 
Harold Fallin Terrell Hudson 
Raines Jordan  

Frank Keller Brant Keller 
Buddy Leger Dick Morrow 
Lamar Perlis Bill Sawyer 
Randy Starling Joel Wood (by telephone)

  

Council Members Not In Attendance  Greg Barineau 
Mike Beres Michael Bowens  
Tommy Burnsed William Culpepper 
Eddie Freeman 

Jack Holbrook George Hooks 
Lynmore James Gary Powell 
Jim Reid Charles Rucks
 Planning Consultants    
Steve Simpson, B&V  Kristin Rowles, GWPPC  
Georgia EPD  Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief  
Bill Morris  
    

MEETING SUMMARY  Page 14  
Upper Flint Water Planning Council  B&V Project 164139 Council Meeting   September 23, 2011 
Meeting Date: September 21, 2011 

 
  sim03926 52 37 11 26 8 111 1 268 1  -14400 Microsoft Word - 20110921_UFL_CM11_Meeting_Summary.docx UFL_CM11_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2 