B&V Project 164139 B&V File C-1.4 September 19, 2011  To: From: cc: Subject:  Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Jim Hawkins, Robert Osborne, and Steve Simpson, Black & Veatch Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief, GA EPD Meeting Summary: Council Meeting 11 on September 14, 2011  The council meeting was held on September 14, 2011 at Callaway Gardens in Pine Mountain. The list of attendees is attached. These minutes will be posted on the Middle Chattahoochee web portal (http://www.middlechattahoochee.org/). Welcome, Introductions, Chairman's Discussion Council Chair Matt Windom called the meeting to order and thanked everyone for attending. Chair Windom said he was impressed with the council member turnout. Paul Chappell welcomed attendees to Pine Mountain and provided an invocation. Chair Windom then allowed members of the public to introduce themselves. The public sign-in sheet is included as an attachment. Next, Chair Windom asked if there were any comments for the last Council Meeting summary. There were no comments and the summary was approved by consensus. Chair Windom reviewed the meeting agenda and said the goal today was to review comments so the council members could achieve consensus on the Final Plan. He said they would vote today on a resolution to submit the Final Plan to EPD. Discussion of GA EPD Direction to the Councils Next, Chair Windom asked Jim Hawkins and Steve Simpson to review EPD's comments. Jim referred the council to page 12 of the pre-meeting packet. EPD's comments to the Middle Chattahoochee Council were transmitted to the council on August 23, 2011. Jim said the comments were grouped in the following categories: General Comments, Water Conservation, and Template/Style. Steve Simpson reviewed the general comments and asked the Council members if they had any specific questions about any of these comments.  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 11 Meeting Date: September 14, 2011  Page 2 B&V Project 164139 September 19, 2011  Steve Davis asked about the intent of the Farm ponds on Page 6-10 of the plan. Steve read the following section of the plan which discussed the farm ponds. " Farm Ponds ­ How would farm ponds affect surface water availability and how can they be incorporated into surface water availability modeling? It should be noted that farm ponds are intended to be used as an alternative irrigation source during drought periods. As they are not to be used for flow augmentation, their operation and use should in no way exacerbate surface water availability gaps during low flow drought conditions." Council member Steve Davis asked if this recommendation was just for new farm ponds. Steve Simpson said this could be interpreted for both new and existing farm ponds. Steve Davis suggested the Council clarify that this recommendation is for new farm ponds to alleviate irrigation demand, not augment stream flows. The council did not have any other suggestions and Chair Windom said they would modify the recommendation to clarify. Steve Simpson then discussed the water conservation comments from the EPD letter on page 15 of the pre-meeting packet. He suggested to the council that they consider modifying the Water Conservation Technical Memo to include estimates of water savings for cooling towers and sub-metering. He said these measures were not included in the estimates originally because they represented a small amount, however, these practices are requirements of the Water Stewardship Act. Steve also suggested adding some additional discussion in this memo on other water sectors and adding some discussion on how water savings relates to the gaps. Council member Jeff Lukken asked if these water conservation management practices are statewide. Steve Simpson said the Council's management practices relate to their region only. Steve read all three demand management practices from Table 6-1 on page 6-2 of the plan which include the following: · · · WC-1: Support implementation of Tier 1 and 2 conservation activities WC-2: Encourage all water providers to consider conservation oriented rate structures at the time of refinancing or recapitalization WC-3: Encourage all water providers to implement education and outreach programs.  Council member Steve Davis said he believed water conservation should be used to close the gap, but the plan stated there is no shortfalls, so conservation is not needed to close a gap. The council agreed to this recommendation about how to address water conservation by consensus.  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 11 Meeting Date: September 14, 2011  Page 3 B&V Project 164139 September 19, 2011  Council member Jeff Lukken said he was concerned that some of the language in Executive Summary in regards to how the Council said there were no "gaps" could be misleading for the region. While noting that the plan documents the Council's contention that the assessment methodology does not identify resource gaps in the region, he specifically pointed out language in the table on page ES-4 that said there was no "gaps". Lukken said this was concerning for our council to have stated anywhere in the plan that there were no gaps. Steve Simpson pointed out there was language on the same page that stated " The Council identified significant gaps between desired lake levels and river flows that fully supported the Council's goals with current operations of the Chattahoochee system as operated by the USACOE under the Revised Interim Operations Plan (RIOP)". Steve noted that the planning contractor had tried extremely hard to both report the outcome of the State's resource assessment and to document the Council's disagreement with the assessment approach. Jim Hawkins suggested that this statement could be clarified with an additional statement about better defining the gap. Chair Windom commented that he believed there was consensus the water resources in the region were limited. He suggested an additional statement about the gap. Chair Windom said the language about the gap should be clear and concise and that the Council believes there is a gap. The Council agreed with this approach by consensus. Public Comments Chair Windom advised that he hoped the Council had a chance to review the Public Comments. Chair Windom said he believed the comments were extremely informative. Chair Windom noted that after he reviewed the comments he wanted to clarify the Council's position on using the unimpaired stream flow only as tool for the resource assessments. Chair Windom proposed that the Council state its support of the State's Interim Instream Flow Protection Policy. The Council did not have any objections. Chair Windom also noted these plans he believed are intended to be a guide for permitting and that rules and regulations will not be superseded based on these plans. The Council did not have any objections. Council member Paul Chappell said he reviewed the comments and that he believed there was nothing that would require a major change in the plan. He believed the Council should consider letting Black & Veatch make the edits and submit the plans. Council member Paul Chappell asked Jim Hawkins what he thought about public comments. Jim stated that for many organizations this was an opportunity to state their  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 11 Meeting Date: September 14, 2011  Page 4 B&V Project 164139 September 19, 2011  position for public record of the overall plan. Jim noted that the comments received represented a large amount of review time and effort. Jim noted there were questions about the resources assessments. In addition, there were a few factual clarifications needed for the plan, such as lake data, that will require some minor edits to the plan. Jim said he believed overall that the comments are informative but do not necessarily warrant plan changes. Chair Windom agreed that he thought the plan was good and was complete with the edits discussed. Chair Windom noted there was a comment that questioned whether the Council was weighing economic benefits as a higher priority than flood storage, but he said this was not the Council's intent. Next, Chair Windom asked if there were any additional comments or concerns from the Council members. There were no further comments from the Council members. Public comments Next, Chair Windom asked if there were any local elected officials or members of the public that would like to comment. Roger Martin, Chattahoochee River Warden Executive Director, thanked the council members for their dedication and hard work. He noted that Alabama still has no water plan and that the Chattahoochee River does have a gap. He advised that the current drought conditions have helped highlight the crisis. He concluded that this was a good plan as a start. Chair Windom agreed that the plan was a good start. Final Discussion of Plan for Submittal to EP Council member Jeff Lukken asked how the Council should incorporate these changes in the plan. Lukken was concerned that there could be a possibility that the plan could be finalized with some wording not completely correct. Chair Windom suggested that Black & Veatch move ahead with the plan changes discussed today and if there is any debate on the final wording then the council plan review committee may need to help finalize. A council member asked who was on the planning review committee. Chair Windom said beside himself others included Steve Davis, Robert Watkins, Don Watson, Jimmy Knight, Harry Lange, Jeff Lukken. Other Council members were invited to participate if a plan review committee conference call was held. Chair Windom asked Steve Simpson to summarize the Council's changes to the plan. Steve said the changes to the plan include the following:  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 11 Meeting Date: September 14, 2011 · · · · · ·  Page 5 B&V Project 164139 September 19, 2011  Clarify language of gaps in the Executive summary on page ES-4 that makes it clear that the council disagrees that there are no gaps. Clarify the Council supports the State's Interim Instream Flow Protection Policy, and that unimpaired flows were used as a modeling assumption. Clarify that the Plan should be used for guidance only for permitting and should not supersede existing regulations and permits. Clarify that the recommendation relating to farm ponds is for new farm ponds to reduce irrigation demands, not for flow augmentation. Include some added information in the Water Conservation Technical Memo as discussed in the meeting today. Include addressing the EPD comments, typographical errors, updates in certain paragraphs such as regarding the litigation language and plan extension request.  The plan will be edited using "Track Changes", the revised document will be distributed for Council review by 9/19, and Council Members need to review and provide comments by close of business on Wednesday, 9/21. If Council members have comments, a plan review committee conference call will be scheduled. Black & Veatch will finalize the document and Chair Windom will transmit to GA EPD. Resolution - Adoption of Plan for Submittal to EP Chair Windom asked for the Council to vote on the following resolution: A RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING MATT WINDOM, COUNCIL CHAIR, AND HARRY LANGE, VICE-CHAIR, ON BEHALF OF THE MIDDLE CHATTAHOOCHEE REGIONAL WATER COUNCIL, TO SUBMIT THE COUNCIL'S RECOMMENDED STATE WATER PLAN TO ALLEN BARNES, DIRECTOR OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DIVISION ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 30, 2011 FOR APPROVAL IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE JANUARY 8, 2008 GUIDANCE DOCUMENT TITLED, GEORGIA COMPRHENSIVE STATE-WIDE WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, ADOPTED BY THE COUNCIL IN ITS 2009 MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT WITH THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DIVISION. This resolution passed unanimously. Chair Windom thanked the Council members, EPD, and Black & Veatch. Chair Windom recognized that the Council members may want to know what is next. Chair Windom asked Tim Cash, EPD, to brief the Council members. Tim advised that the Council member survey showed strong interest among Council members for continuing to serve. They have passed this information on to the EPD Director and the Governor's staff. Council member Robert Watkins asked how long their term was for. Tim said their term was for 3 years which started February 2009, so their term ends February 2012.  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 11 Meeting Date: September 14, 2011  Page 6 B&V Project 164139 September 19, 2011  Council member Jeff Lukken said the Council appreciated the excellent leadership from Chair Windom and Vice-Chair Lange. There were no additional comments and the meeting was adjourned.  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 11 Meeting Date: September 14, 2011  Page 7 B&V Project 164139 September 19, 2011  Attachment 1: Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting Attendance ­ September 14, 2011 Council Members Alan Bell Jimmy Bradley Paul Chappell Steve Davis Larry Dillard Gardiner Garrard Gerald Greene Joe Griffith Bill Heath Jimmy Knight Harry Lange Council Members Not In Attendance Phillip Eidson Thomas Ellis Bill Gregory Joe Maltese Planning Consultants Jim Hawkins, B&V Steve Simpson, B&V Georgia EPD Tim Cash, Assistant Branch Chief Bill Morris  Jeff Lukken Gordon Moss Denny Rogers Walter Rosso Jimmy Thompson Robert Watkins Don Watson Matt Windom Jim Woods Robie York  Aaron McWhorter Ken Penuel Randy Simpkins Brad Yates  Robert Osborne, B&V  MEETING SUMMARY Middle Chattahoochee Water Planning Council Council Meeting 10 Meeting Date: April 13, 2010  Page 8 B&V Project 164139 April 19, 2010   sim03926 49 22 11 19 8 111 1 261 1 EDT NA Microsoft Word - 20110914_MCH_CM11_MEETING_SUMMARY.docx MCH_CM11_Summary.pdf en PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2 